[Illustration]     BUCKY O’CONNOR  A Tale of the Unfenced Border  By William MacLeod Raine     To My Brother  EDGAR C. RAINE  MY DEAR WANDERER:  I write your name on this page that you may know we hold you not less in our thoughts because you have heard and answered again the call of the frozen North, have for the time disappeared, swallowed in some of its untrodden wilds. As in those old days of 59 Below On Bonanza, the long Winter night will be of interminable length. Armed with this note of introduction then, Bucky O’Connor offers himself, with the best bow of one Adventurer to another, as a companion to while away some few of those lonely hours.  March, 1910, Denver.     BUCKY O’CONNOR     CONTENTS   BUCKY O’CONNOR  CHAPTER I. ENTER “BEAR-TRAP” COLLINS   CHAPTER II. TAXATION WITHOUT REPRESENTATION   CHAPTER III. THE SHERIFF INTRODUCES HIMSELF   CHAPTER IV. A BLUFF IS CALLED   CHAPTER V. BUCKY ENTERTAINS   CHAPTER VI. BUCKY MAKES A DISCOVERY   CHAPTER VII. IN THE LAND OF REVOLUTIONS   CHAPTER VIII. FIRST BLOOD!   CHAPTER IX. "ADORE HAS ONLY ONE D.”   CHAPTER X. THE HOLD-UP OF THE M. C. P. FLYER   CHAPTER XI. "STONE WALLS DO NOT A PRISON MAKE.”   CHAPTER XII. A CLEAN WHITE MAN’S OPTION   CHAPTER XIII. BUCKY’S FIRST-RATE REASONS   CHAPTER XIV. LE ROI EST MORT; VIVE LE ROI   CHAPTER XV. IN THE SECRET CHAMBER   CHAPTER XVI. JUAN VALDEZ SCORES   CHAPTER XVII. HIDDEN VALLEY   CHAPTER XVIII. A DINNER FOR THREE   CHAPTER XIX. A VILLON OF THE DESERT   CHAPTER XX. BACK TO GOD’S COUNTRY   CHAPTER XXI. THE WOLF PACK   CHAPTER XXII. FOR A GOOD REASON      CHAPTER I. ENTER “BEAR-TRAP” COLLINS   She had been aware of him from the moment of his spectacular entrance, though no slightest sign of interest manifested itself in her indolent, incurious eyes. Indeed, his abundant and picturesque area was so vivid that it would have been difficult not to feel his presence anywhere, let alone on a journey so monotonous as this was proving to be.  It had been at a water-tank, near Socorro, that the Limited, churning furiously through brown Arizona in pursuit of a lost half-hour, jarred to a sudden halt that shook sleep from the drowsy eyes of bored passengers. Through the window of her Pullman the young woman in Section 3 had glimpsed a bevy of angry train officials eddying around a sturdy figure in the center, whose strong, lean head rose confidently above the press. There was the momentary whirl of a scuffle, out of the tangle of which shot a brakeman as if propelled from a catapult. The circle parted, brushed aside by a pair of lean shoulders, muscular and broad. Yet a few moments and the owner of the shoulders led down the aisle to the vacant section opposite her a procession whose tail was composed of protesting trainmen.  “You had no right to flag the train, Sheriff Collins, and you’ll have to get off; that’s all there is to it,” the conductor was explaining testily.  “Oh, that’s all right,” returned the offender with easy good nature, making himself at home in Section 4. “Tell the company to send in its bill. No use jawing about it.”  “You’ll have to get off, sir.”  “That’s right—at Tucson.”  “No, sir. You’ll have to get off here. I have no authority to let you ride.”  “Didn’t I hear you say the train was late? Don’t you think you’d arrive earlier at the end of your run if your choo-choo got to puffing?”  “You’ll have to get off, sir.”  “I hate to disoblige,” murmured the owner of the jingling spurs, the dusty corduroys, and the big, gray hat, putting his feet leisurely on the cushion in front of him. “But doesn’t it occur to you that you are a man of one idea?”  “This is the Coast Limited. It doesn’t stop for anybody—not even for the president of the road.”  “You don’t say! Well, I ce’tainly appreciate the honor you did me in stopping to take me on.” His slight drawl was quite devoid of concern.  “But you had no right to flag the train. Can’t you understand _anything?_” groaned the conductor.  “You explain it again to me, sonny. I’m surely thick in the haid,” soothed the intruder, and listened with bland good-humor to the official’s flow of protest.  “Well—well! Disrupted the whole transcontinental traffic, didn’t I? And me so innocent, too. Now, this is how I figured it out. Here’s me in a hurry to get to Tucson. Here comes your train a-foggin’—also and likewise hittin’ the high spots for Tucson. Seemed like we ought to travel in company, and I was some dubious she’d forget to stop unless I flagged her. Wherefore, I aired my bandanna in the summer breeze.”  “But you don’t understand.” The conductor began to explain anew as to a dull child. “It’s against the law. You’ll get into trouble.”  “Put me in the calaboose, will they?”  “It’s no joke.”  “Well, it does seem to be worrying you,” Mr. Collins conceded. “Don’t mind me. Free your mind proper.”  The conductor, glancing about nervously, noticed that passengers were smiling broadly. His official dignity was being chopped to mince-meat. Back came his harassed gaze to the imperturbable Collins with the brown, sun-baked face and the eyes blue and untroubled as an Arizona sky. Out of a holster attached to the sagging belt that circled the corduroy trousers above his hips gleamed the butt of a revolver. But in the last analysis the weapon of the occasion was purely a moral one. The situation was one not covered in the company’s rule book, and in the absence of explicit orders the trainman felt himself unequal to that unwavering gaze and careless poise. Wherefore, he retreated, muttering threats of what the company would do.  “Now, if I had only known it was against the law. My thick haid’s always roping trouble for me,” the plainsman confided to the Pullman conductor, with twinkling eyes.  That official unbent. “Talking about thick heads, I’m glad my porter has one. If it weren’t iron-plated and copper-riveted he’d be needing a doctor now, the way you stood him on it.”  “No, did I? Ce’tainly an accident. The nigger must have been in my way as I climbed into the car. Took the kink out of his hair, you say? Here, Sam!” He tossed a bill to the porter, who was rolling affronted eyes at him. “Do you reckon this is big enough to plaster your injured feelings, boy?”  The white smile flashed at him by the porter was a receipt for indemnity paid in full.  Sheriff Collins’ perception of his neighbor across the aisle was more frank in its interest than the girl’s had been of him. The level, fearless gaze of the outdoors West looked at her unabashed, appreciating swiftly her points as they impinged themselves upon his admiration. The long, lithe lines of the slim, supple body, the languid grace missing hauteur only because that seemed scarce worth while, the unconscious pride of self that fails to be offensive only in a young woman so well equipped with good looks as this one indubitably was the rider of the plains had appraised them all before his eyes dismissed her from his consideration and began a casual inspection of the other passengers.  Inside of half an hour he had made himself _persona grata_ to everybody in the car except his dark-eyed neighbor across the way. That this dispenser of smiles and cigars decided to leave her out in the distribution of his attentions perhaps spoke well for his discernment. Certainly responsiveness to the geniality of casual fellow passengers did not impress Mr. Collins as likely to be an outstanding, quality in her. But with the drummer from Chicago, the young mining engineer going to Sonora, the two shy little English children just in front of him traveling to meet their father in California, he found intuitively common ground of interest. Even Major Mackenzie, the engineer in charge of the large irrigation project being built by a company in southern Arizona, relaxed at one of the plainsman’s humorous tales.  It was after Collins had half-depopulated the car by leading the more jovial spirits back in search of liquid refreshments that an urbane clergyman, now of Boston but formerly of Pekin, Illinois, professedly much interested in the sheriff’s touch-and-go manner as presumably quite characteristic of the West, dropped into the vacant seat beside Major Mackenzie.  “And who might our energetic friend be?” he asked, with an ingratiating smile.  The young woman in front of them turned her head ever so slightly to listen.  “Val Collins is his name,” said the major. “Sometimes called ‘Bear-trap Collins.’ He has always lived on the frontier. At least, I met him twelve years ago when he was riding mail between Aravaipa and Mesa. He was a boy then, certainly not over eighteen, but in a desperate fight he had killed two men who tried to hold up the mail. Cow-puncher, stage-driver, miner, trapper, sheriff, rough rider, politician—he’s past master at them all.”  “And why the appellation of ‘Bear-trap,’ may I ask?” The smack of pulpit oratory was not often missing in the edifying discourse of the Reverend Peter Melancthon Brooks.  “Well, sir, that’s a story. He was trapping in the Tetons about five years ago thirty miles from the nearest ranch-house. One day, while he was setting a bear-trap, a slide of snow plunged down from the tree branches above and freed the spring, catching his hand between its jaws. With his feet and his other hand he tried to open that trap for four hours, without the slightest success. There was not one chance in a million of help from outside. In point of fact, Collins had not seen a human being for a month. There was only one thing to do, and he did it.”  “And that was?”  “You probably noticed that he wears a glove over his left hand. The reason, sir, is that he has an artificial hand.”  “You mean—” The Reverend Peter paused to lengthen his delicious thrill of horror.  “Yes, sir. That’s just what I mean. He hacked his hand off at the wrist with his hunting-knife.”  “Why, the man’s a hero!” cried the clergyman, with unction.  Mackenzie flung him a disgusted look. “We don’t go much on heroes out here. He’s game, if that’s what you mean. And able, too. Bucky O’Connor himself isn’t any smarter at following a trail.”  “And who is Bucky O’Connor?”  “He’s the man that just ran down Fernendez. Think I’ll have a smoke, sir. Care to join me?”  But the Pekin-Bostonian preferred to stay and jot down in his note-book the story of the bear-trap, to be used later as a sermon illustration. This may have been the reason he did not catch the quick look that passed without the slightest flicker of the eyelids between Major Mackenzie and the young woman in Section 3. It was as if the old officer had wired her a message in some code the cipher of which was known only to them.  But the sheriff, returning at the head of his cohorts, caught it, and wondered what meaning might lie back of that swift glance. Major Mackenzie and this dark-eyed beauty posed before others as strangers, yet between them lay some freemasonry of understanding to which he had not the key.  Collins did not know that the aloofness in the eyes of Miss Wainwright—he had seen the name on her suit-case—gave way to horror when her glance fell on his gloved hand. She had a swift, shuddering vision of a grim-faced man, jaws set like a vise, hacking at his wrist with a hunting-knife. But the engaging impudence of his eye, the rollicking laughter in his voice, shut out the picture instantly.  The young man resumed his seat, and Miss Wainwright her listless inspection of the flying stretches of brown desert. Dusk was beginning to fall, and the porter presently lit the lamps. Collins bought a magazine from the newsboy and relapsed into it, but before he was well adjusted to reading the Limited pounded to a second unscheduled halt.  Instantly the magazine was thrown aside and Collins’ curly head thrust out of the window. Presently the head reappeared, simultaneously with the crack of a revolver, the first of a detonating fusillade.  “Another of your impatient citizens eager to utilize the unspeakable convenience of rapid transit,” suggested the clergyman, with ponderous jocosity.  “No, sir; nothing so illegal,” smiled the cattleman, a whimsical light in his daredevil eyes. He leaned forward and whispered a word to the little girl in front of him, who at once led her younger brother back to his section.  “I had hoped it would prove to be more diverting experience for a tenderfoot,” condescended the gentleman of the cloth.  “It’s ce’tainly a pleasure to be able to gratify you, sir. You’ll be right pleased to know that it is a train hold-up.” He waved his hand toward the door, and at the word, as if waiting for his cue, a masked man appeared at the end of the passage with a revolver in each hand.     CHAPTER II. TAXATION WITHOUT REPRESENTATION   “Hands up!”  There was a ring of crisp menace in the sinister voice that was a spur to obedience. The unanimous show of hands voted “Aye” with a hasty precision that no amount of drill could have compassed.  It was a situation that might have made for laughter had there been spectators to appreciate. But of whatever amusement was to be had one of the victims seemed to hold a monopoly. Collins, his arm around the English children by way of comfort, offered a sardonic smile at the consternation his announcement and its fulfillment had created, but none of his fellow passengers were in the humor to respond.  The shock of an earthquake could not have blanched ruddy faces more surely. The Chicago drummer, fat and florid, had disappeared completely behind a buttress of the company’s upholstery.  “God bless my soul!” gasped the Pekin-Bostonian, dropping his eyeglass and his accent at the same moment. The dismay in his face found a reflection all over the car. Miss Wainwright’s hand clutched at her breast for an instant, and her color ebbed till her lips were ashen, but her neighbor across the aisle noticed that her eyes were steady and her figure tense.  “Scared stiff, but game,” was his mental comment.  “Gents to the right and ladies to the left; line up against the walls; everybody waltz.” called the man behind the guns, with grim humor.  The passengers fell into line as directed, Collins with the rest.  “You’re calling this dance, son; it’s your say-so, I guess,” he conceded.  “Keep still, or I’ll shoot you full of holes,” growled the autocrat of the artillery.  “Why, sure! Ain’t you the real thing in Jesse Jameses?” soothed the sheriff.  At the sound of Collins’ voice, the masked man had started perceptibly, and his right hand had jumped forward an inch or two to cover the speaker more definitely. Thereafter, no matter what else engaged his attention, the gleaming eyes behind the red bandanna never wandered for a moment from the big plainsman. He was taking no risks, for he remembered the saying current in Arizona, that after Collins’ hardware got into action there was nothing left to do but plant the deceased and collect the insurance. He had personal reasons to know the fundamental accuracy of the colloquialism.  The train-conductor fussed up to the masked outlaw with a ludicrous attempt at authority. “You can’t rob the passengers on this train. I’m not responsible for the express-car, but the coaches—”  A bullet almost grazed his ear and shattered a window on its way to the desert.  “Drift, you red-haired son of a Mexican?” ordered the man behind the red bandanna. “Git back to that seat real prompt. This here’s taxation without representation.”  The conductor drifted as per suggestion.  The minutes ticked themselves away in a tense strain marked by pounding hearts. The outlaw stood at the end of the aisle, watching the sheriff alertly.  “Why doesn’t the music begin?” volunteered Collins, by way of conversation, and quoted: “On with the dance. Let joy be unconfined.”  A dull explosion answered his question. The bandits were blowing open the safe in the express-car with dynamite, pending which the looting of the passengers was at a standstill.  A second masked figure joined his companion at the end of the passage and held a hurried conversation with him. Fragments of their low-voiced talk came to Collins.  “Only thirty thousand in the express-car. Not a red cent on the old man himself.”  “Where’s the rest?” The irritation in the newcomer’s voice was pronounced.  Collins slewed his head and raked him with keen eyes that missed not a detail. He was certain that he had never seen the man before, yet he knew at once that the trim, wiry figure, so clean of build and so gallant of bearing, could belong only to Wolf Leroy, the most ruthless outlaw of the Southwest. It was written in his jaunty insolence, in the flashing eyes. He was a handsome fellow, white-toothed, black-haired, lithely tigerish, with masterful mouth and eyes of steel, so far as one might judge behind the white mask he wore. Alert, cruel, fearless from the head to the heel of him, he looked the very devil to lead an enterprise so lawless and so desperate as this. His vigilant eyes swept contemptuously up and down the car, rested for a moment on the young woman in Section 3, and came back to his partner.  “Bah! A flock of sheep—tamest bunch of spring lambs we ever struck. I’ll send Scotty in to go through them. If anybody gets gay, drop him.” And the outlaw turned on his heel.  Another of the highwaymen took his place, a stout, squat figure in the flannel shirt, spurs, and chaps of a cow-puncher. It took no second glance to tell Collins this bandy-legged fellow had been a rider of the range.  “Come, gentlemen, get a move on you,” Collins implored. “This train’s due at Tucson by eight o’clock. We’re more than an hour late now. I’m holding down the job of sheriff in that same town, and I’m awful anxious to get a posse out after a bunch of train-robbers. So burn the wind, and go through the car on the jump. Help yourself to anything you find. Who steals my purse takes trash. ’Tis something, nothing. ’Twas mine; ’tis his. That’s right, you’ll find my roll in that left-hand pocket. I hate to have you take that gun, though. I meant to run you down with that same old Colt’s reliable. Oh, well, just as you say. No, those kids get a free pass. They’re going out to meet papa at Los Angeles, boys. See?”  Collins’ running fire of comment had at least the effect of restoring the color to some cheeks that had been washed white and of snatching from the outlaws some portion of their sense of dominating the situation. But there was a veiled vigilance in his eyes that belied his easy impudence.  “That lady across the aisle gets a pass, too, boys,” continued the sheriff. “She’s scared stiff now, and you won’t bother her, if you’re white men. Her watch and purse are on the seat. Take them, if you want them, and let it go at that.”  Miss Wainwright listened to this dialogue silently. She stood before them cool and imperious and unwavering, but her face was bloodless and the pulse in her beautiful soft throat fluttered like a caged bird.  “Who’s doing this job?” demanded one of the hold-ups, wheeling savagely on the impassive officer “Did I say we were going to bother the lady? Who’s doing this job, Mr. Sheriff?”  “You are. I’d hate to be messing the job like you—holding up the wrong train by mistake.” This was a shot in the dark, and it did not quite hit the bull’s-eye. “I wouldn’t trust you boys to rob a hen-roost, the amateur way you go at it. When you get through, you’ll all go to drinking like blue blotters. I know your kind—hell-bent to spend what you cash in, and every mother’s son of you in the pen or with his toes turned up inside of a month.”  “Who’ll put us there?” gruffly demanded the bowlegged one.  Collins smiled at him with confidence superb “Mebbe I will—and if I don’t Bucky O’Connor will—those of you that are left alive when you go through shooting each other in the back. Oh, I see your finish to a fare-you-well.”  “Cheese it, or I’ll bump you off.” The first out law drove his gun into the sheriff’s ribs.  “That’s all right. You don’t need to punctuate that remark. I line up with the sky-pilot and chew the cud of silence. I merely wanted to frame up to you how this thing’s going to turn out. Don’t come back at me and say I didn’t warn you, sonnie.”  “You make my head ache,” snarled the bandy-legged outlaw sourly, as he passed down with his sack, accumulating tribute as he passed down the aisle with his sack, accumulating tribute as he went.  The red-kerchiefed robber whooped when they came to the car conductor. “Dig up, Mr. Pullman. Go way down into your jeans. It’s a right smart pleasure to divert the plunder of your bloated corporation back to the people. What! Only fifty-seven dollars. Oh, dig deeper, Mr. Pullman.”  The drummer contributed to the sack eighty-four dollars, a diamond ring, and a gold watch. His hands were trembling so that they played a tattoo on the sloping ceiling above him.  “What’s the matter, Fatty? Got a chill?” inquired one of the robbers, as he deftly swept the plunder into the sack.  “For—God’s sake—don’t shoot. I have—a wife—and five children,” he stammered, with chattering teeth.  “No race suicide for Fatty. But whyfor do they let a sick man like you travel all by his lone?”  “I don’t know—I—Please turn that weapon another way.”  “Plumb chuck full of malaria,” soliloquized the owner of the weapon, playfully running its business end over the Chicago man’s anatomy. “Shakes worse’n a pair of dice. Here, Fatty. Load up with quinine and whisky. It’s sure good for chills.” The man behind the bandanna gravely handed his victim back a dollar. “Write me if it cures you. Now for the sky-pilot. No white chips on this plate, parson. It’s a contribution to the needy heathen. You want to be generous. How much do you say?”  The man of the cloth reluctantly said thirty dollars, a Lincoln penny, and a silver-plated watch inherited from his fathers. The watch was declined with thanks, the money accepted without.  The Pullman porter came into the car under compulsion of a revolver in the hand of a fourth outlaw, one in a black mask. His trembling finger pointed out the satchel and suit-case of Major Mackenzie, and under orders he carried out the baggage belonging to the irrigation engineer. Collin observed that the bandit in the black mask was so nervous that the revolver in his hand quivered like an aspen in the wind. He was slenderer and much shorter than the Mexican, so that the sheriff decided he was a mere boy.  It was just after he had left that three shots in rapid succession rang out in the still night air.  The red-bandannaed one and his companion, who had apparently been waiting for the signal, retreated backward to the end of the car, still keeping the passengers covered. They flung rapidly two or three bullets through the roof, and under cover of the smoke slipped out into the night. A moment later came the thud of galloping horses, more shots, and, when the patter of hoofs had died away—silence.  The sheriff was the first to break it. He thrust his brown hands deep into his pockets and laughed—laughed with the joyous, rollicking abandon of a tickled schoolboy.  “Hysterics?” ventured the mining engineer sympathetically.  Collins wiped his eyes. “Call ’em anything you like. What pleases me is that the reverend gentleman should have had this diverting experience so prompt after he was wishing for it.” He turned, with concern, to the clergyman. “Satisfied, sir? Did our little entertainment please, or wasn’t it up to the mark?”  But the transported native of Pekin was game. “I’m quite satisfied, if you are. I think the affair cost you a hundred dollars or so more than it did me.”  “That’s right,” agreed the sheriff heartily. “But I don’t grudge it—not a cent of it. The show was worth the price of admission.”  The car conductor had a broadside ready for him. “Seems to me you shot off your mouth more than you did that big gun of yours, Mr. Sheriff.”  Collins laughed, and clapped him on the back. “That’s right. I’m a regular phonograph, when you wind me up.” He did not think it necessary to explain that he had talked to make the outlaws talk, and that he had noted the quality of their voices so carefully that he would know them again among a thousand. Also he had observed—other things—the garb of each of the men he had seen, their weapons, their manner, and their individual peculiarities.  The clanking car took up the rhythm of the rails as the delayed train plunged forward once more into the night. Again the clack of tongues, set free from fear, buzzed eagerly. The glow of the afterclap of danger was on them, and in the warm excitement each forgot the paralyzing fear that had but now padlocked his lips. Courage came flowing back into flabby cheeks and red blood into hearts of water.  At the next station the Limited stopped, and the conductor swung from a car before the wheels had ceased rolling and went running into the telegraph office.  “Fire a message through for me, Pat. The Limited has been held up,” he announced.  “Held up?” gasped the operator.  “That’s right. Get this message right through to Sabin. I’m not going to wait for an answer. Tell him I’ll stop at Apache for further instructions.”  With which the conductor was out again waving his lantern as a signal for the train to start. Sheriff Collins and Major Mackenzie had entered the office at his heels. They too had messages to send, but it was not until the train was already plunging into the night that the station agent read the yellow slips they had left and observed that both of them went to the same person.  “Lieutenant Bucky O’Connor, Douglas, Arizona,” was the address he read at the top of each. His comment serves to show the opinion generally in the sunburned territory respecting one of its citizens.  “You’re wise guys, gents, both of yez. This is shure a case for the leftenant. It’s send for Bucky quick when the band begins to play,” he grinned.  Sitting down, he gave the call for Tucson, preparatory to transmitting the conductor’s message to the division superintendent. His fingers were just striking the first tap when a silken voice startled him.  “One moment, friend. No use being in a hurry.”  The agent looked up and nearly fell from his stool. He was gazing into the end of a revolver held carelessly in the hand of a masked man leaning indolently on the counter.  “Whe—where did you come from?” the operator gasped.  “Kaintucky, but I been here a right smart spell. Why? You takin’ the census?” came the drawling answer.  “I didn’t hear youse come in.”  “I didn’t hear you come in, either,” the man behind the mask mocked. But even as he spoke his manner changed, and crisp menace rang in his voice. “Have you sent those messages yet?”  “Wha—what messages?”  “Those lying on your desk. I say, have you sent them?”  “Not yet.”  “Hand them over here.”  The operator passed them across the counter without demur.  “Now reach for the roof.”  Up shot the station agent’s hands. The bandit glanced over the written sheets and commented aloud:  “Huh! One from the conductor and one from Mackenzie. I expected those. But this one from Collins is ce’tainly a surprise party. I didn’t know he was on the train. Lucky for him I didn’t, or mebbe I’d a-put his light for good and all. Friend, I reckon we’ll suppress these messages. Military necessity, you understand.” And with that he lightly tore up the yellow sheets and tossed them away.  “The conductor will wire when he reaches Apache,” the operator suggested, not very boldly.  The outlaw rolled a cigarette deftly and borrowed a match. “He most surely will. But Apache is seventy miles from here. That gives us an extra hour and a half, and with us right now time is a heap more valuable than money. You may tell Bucky O’Connor when you see him that that extra hour and a half cinches our escape, and we weren’t on the anxious seat any without it.”  It may have been true, as the train robber had just said, that time was more valuable to him then than money, but if so he must have held the latter of singularly little value. For he sat him down on the counter with his back against the wall and his legs stretched full length in front of him and glanced over the Tucson _Star_ in leisurely fashion, while Pat’s arms still projected roofward.  The operator, beginning to get over his natural fright, could not withhold a reluctant admiration of this man’s aplomb. There was a certain pantherish lightness about the outlaw’s movements, a trim grace of figure which yet suggested rippling muscles perfectly under control, and a quiet wariness of eye more potent than words at repressing insurgent impulses. Certainly if ever there was a cool customer and one perfectly sure of himself, this was he.  “Not a thing in the _Star_ to-day,” Pat’s visitor commented, as he flung it away with a yawn. “I’ll let a thousand dollars of the express company’s money that there will be something more interesting in it to-morrow.”  “That’s right,” agreed the agent.  “But I won’t be here to read it. My engagements take me south. I’ll make a present to the great Lieutenant O’Connor of the information. We’re headed south, tell him. And tell Mr. Sheriff Collins, too—happy to entertain him if he happens our way. If it would rest your hands any there’s no law against putting them in your trousers pockets, my friend.”  From outside there came a short sharp whistle. The man on the counter answered it, and slipped at once to the floor. The door opened, to let in another masked form, but one how different from the first! Here was no confidence almost insolent in its nonchalance. The figure was slight and boyish, the manner deprecating, the brown eyes shy and shrinking He was so obviously a novice at outlawry that fear sat heavy upon his shoulders. When he spoke, almost in a whisper, his teeth chattered.  “All ready, sir.”  “The wires are cut?” demanded his leader crisply.  “Yes, sir.”  “On both sides?”  “On both sides.”  His chief relieved the operator of the revolver in his desk, broke it, emptied out the shells, and flung them through the window, then tossed the weapon back to its owner.  “You’ll not shoot yourself by accident now,” he explained, and with that he had followed his companion into the night.  There came to the station agent the sound of galloping horses, growing fainter, until a heavy silence seemed to fill the night. He stole to the door and locked it, pulled down the window blinds, and then reloaded his revolver with feverish haste. This done, he sat down before his keys with the weapon close at hand and frantically called for Tucson over and over again. No answer came to him, nor from the other direction when he tried that. The young bandit had told the truth. His companions had cut the wires and so isolated from the world for the time the scene of the hold-up. The agent understood now why the leader of the outlaws had honored him with so much of his valuable time. He had stayed to hold back the telegrams until he knew the wires were cut.     CHAPTER III. THE SHERIFF INTRODUCES HIMSELF   Bear-trap Collins, presuming on the new intimacy born of an exciting experience shared in common, stepped across the aisle, flung aside Miss Wainwright’s impedimenta, and calmly seated himself beside her. She was a young woman capable of a hauteur chillier than ice to undue familiarity, but she did not choose at this moment to resent his assumption of a footing that had not existed an hour ago. Picturesque and unconventional conduct excuses itself when it is garbed in picturesque and engaging manners. She had, besides, other reasons for wanting to meet him, and they had to do with a sudden suspicion that flamed like tow in her brain. She had something for which to thank him—much more than he would be likely to guess, she thought—and she was wondering, with a surge of triumph, whether the irony of fate had not made his pretended consideration for her the means of his undoing.  “I am sorry you lost so much, Miss Wainwright,” he told her.  “But, after all, I did not lose so much as you. Her dark, deep-pupiled eyes, long-lashed as Diana’s, swept round to meet his coolly.  “That’s a true word. My reputation has gone glimmering for fair, I guess.” He laughed ruefully. “I shouldn’t wonder, ma’am, when election time comes round, if the boys ain’t likely to elect to private life the sheriff that lay down before a bunch of miscreants.”  “Why did you do it?”  His humorous glance roamed round the car. “Now, I couldn’t think it proper for me to shoot up this sumptuous palace on wheels. And wouldn’t some casual passenger be likely to get his lights put out when the band began to play? Would you want that Boston church to be shy a preacher, ma’am?”  Her lips parted slightly in a curve of scorn. “I suppose you had your reasons for not interfering.”  “Surely, ma’am. I hated to have them make a sieve of me.”  “Were you afraid?”  “Most men are when Wolf Leroy’s gang is on the war path.”  “Wolf Leroy?”  “That was Wolf who came in to see they were doing the job right. He’s the worst desperado on the border—a sure enough bad proposition, I reckon. They say he’s part Spanish and part Indian, but all pisen. Others say he’s a college man of good family. I don’t know about that, for nobody knows who he really is. But the name is a byword in the country. People lower their voices when they speak of him and his night-riders.”  “I see. And you were afraid of him?”  “Very much.”  Her narrowed eyes looked over the strong lines of his lean face and were unconvinced. “I expect you found a better reason than that for not opposing them.”  He turned to her with frank curiosity. “I’d like real well to have you put a name to it.”  But he was instantly aware that her interest had been side tracked. Major Mackenzie had entered the car and was coming down the aisle. Plainer than words his eyes asked a question, and hers answered it.  The sheriff stopped him with a smiling query: “Hit hard, major?”  Mackenzie frowned. “The scoundrels took thirty thousand from the express car, I understand. Twenty thousand of it belonged to our company. I was expecting to pay off the men next Tuesday.”  “Hope we’ll be able to run them down for you,” returned Collins cheerfully. “I suppose you lay it to Wolf Leroy’s gang?”  “Of course. The work was too well done to leave any doubt of that.” The major resumed his seat behind Miss Wainwright.  To that young woman the sheriff repeated his unanswered question in the form of a statement. “I’m waiting to learn that better reason, ma’am.”  She was possessed of that spice of effrontery more to be desired than beauty. “Shall we say that you had no wish to injure your friends?”  “My friends?”  Her untender eyes mocked his astonishment. “Do I choose the wrong word?” she asked, with an audacity of a courage that delighted him. “Perhaps they are not your friends—these train robbers? Perhaps they are mere casual acquaintances?”  His bold eyes studied with a new interest her superb, confident youth—the rolling waves of splendid Titian hair, the lovely, subtle eyes with the depths of shadowy pools in them, the alluring lines of long and supple loveliness. Certainly here was no sweet, ingenuous youth all prone to blushes, but the complex heir of that world-old wisdom the weaker sex has shaped to serve as a weapon against the strength that must be met with the wit of Mother Eve.  “You ce’tainly have a right vivid imagination, ma’am,” he said dryly.  “You are quite sure you have never seen them before?” her velvet voice asked.  He laughed. “Well, no—I can’t say I am.”  “Aren’t you quite sure you have seen them?”  Her eyes rested on him very steadily.  “You’re smart as a whip, Miss Wainwright. I take off my hat to a young lady so clever. I guess you’re right. About the identity of one of those masked gentlemen I’m pretty well satisfied.”  She drew a long breath. “I thought so.”  “Yes,” he went on evenly, “I once earmarked him so that I’d know him again in case we met.”  “I beg pardon. You—what?”  “Earmarked him. Figure of speech, ma’am. You may not have observed that the curly-headed person behind the guns was shy the forefinger of his right hand. We had a little difficulty once when he was resisting arrest, and it just happened that my gun fanned away his trigger finger.” He added reminiscently:  “A good boy, too, Neil was once. We used to punch together on the Hashknife. A straight-up rider, the kind a fellow wants when Old Man Trouble comes knocking at the door. Well, I reckon he’s a miscreant now, all right.”  “They knew _you_—at least two of them did.”  “I’ve been pirootin’ around this country, boy and man, for fifteen years. I ain’t responsible for every yellow dog that knows me,” he drawled.  “And I noticed that when you told them not to rob the children and not to touch me they did as you said.”  “Hypnotism,” he suggested, with a smile.  “So, not being a child, I put two and two together and draw an inference.”  He seemed to be struggling with his mirth. “I see you do. Well, ma’am, I’ve been most everything since I hit the West, but this is the first time I’ve been taken for a train robber.”  “I didn’t say that,” she cried quickly.  “I think you mentioned an inference.” The low laugh welled out of him and broke in his face. “I’ve been busy on one, too. It’s a heap nearer the truth than yours, Miss Mackenzie.”  Her startled eyes and the swift movement of her hand toward her heart showed him how nearly he had struck home, how certainly he had shattered her cool indifference of manner.  He leaned forward, so close that even in the roar of the train his low whisper reached her. “Shall I tell you why the hold-ups didn’t find more money on your father or in the express car, Miss Mackenzie?”  She was shaken, so much so that her agitation trembled on her lips.  “Shall I tell you why your hand went to your breast when I first mentioned that the train was going to be held up, and again when your father’s eyes were firing a mighty pointed question at you?”  “I don’t know what you mean,” she retorted, again mistress of herself.  Her gallant bearing compelled his admiration. The scornful eyes, the satirical lift of the nostrils, the erect, graceful figure, all flung a challenge at him. He called himself hard names for putting her on the rack, but the necessity to make her believe in him was strong within him.  “I noticed you went right chalky when I announced the hold-up, and I thought it was because you were scared. That was where I did you an injustice, ma’am, and you can call this an apology. You’ve got sand. If it hadn’t been for what you carry in the chamois skin hanging on the chain round your neck you would have enjoyed every minute of the little entertainment. You’re as game as they make them.”  “May I ask how you arrived at this melodramatic conclusion?” she asked, her disdainful lip curling.  “By using my eyes and my ears, ma’am. I shouldn’t have noticed your likeness to Major Mackenzie, perhaps, if I hadn’t observed that there was a secret understanding between you. Now, whyfor should you be passing as strangers? I could guess one reason, and only one. There have twice been attempted hold-ups of the paymaster of the Yuba reservoir. It was to avoid any more of these that Major Mackenzie took charge personally of paying the men. He has made good up till now. But there have been rumors for months that he would be held up either before leaving the train or while he was crossing the desert. He didn’t want to be seen taking the boodle from the express company at Tucson. He would rather have the impression get out that this was just a casual visit. It occurred to him to bring along some unsuspected party to help him out. The robbers would never expect to find the money on a woman. That’s why the major brought his daughter with him. Doesn’t it make you some uneasy to be carrying fifty thousand in small bills sewed in your clothes and hung round your neck?”  She broke into musical laughter, natural and easy. “I don’t happen to have fifty thousand with me.”  “Oh, well, say forty thousand. I’m no wizard to guess the exact figure.”  Her swift glance at him was almost timid.  “Nor forty thousand,” she murmured.  “I should think, ma’am, you’d crinkle more than a silk-lined lady sailing down a church aisle on Sunday.”  A picture in the magazine she was toying with seemed to interest her.  “I expect that’s the signal for ‘Exit Collins.’ I’ll say good-by till next time, Miss Mackenzie.”  “Oh, is there going to be a next time?” she asked, with elaborate carelessness.  “Several of them.”  “Indeed!”  He took a notebook from his pocket and wrote.  “I ain’t the son of a prophet, but I’m venturing a prediction,” he explained.  She had nothing to say, and she said it competently.  “Concerning an investment in futurities I’m making,” he continued.  Her magazine article seemed to be beginning, well.  “It’s a little guess about how this train robbery is coming out. If you don’t mind, I’ll leave it with you.” He tore the page out, put it in an empty envelope, sealed the flap, and handed it to her.  “Open it in a month, and see whether my guess is a good one.”  The dusky lashes swept round indolently. “Suppose I were to open it to-night.”  “I’ll risk it,” smiled the blue eyes.  “On honor, am I?”  “That’s it.” He held out a big, brown hand.  “You’re going to try to capture the robbers, are you?”  “I’ve been thinking that way—with the help of Lieutenant Bucky O’Connor, I mean.”  “And I suppose you’ve promised yourself success.”  “It’s on the knees of chance, ma’am. We may get them. They may get us.”  “But this prediction of yours?” She held up the sealed envelope.  “That’s about another matter.”  “But I don’t understand. You said—” She gave him a chance to explain.  “It ain’t meant you should. You’ll understand plenty at the proper time.”  He offered her his hand again. “We’re slowing down for Apache. Good-by—till next time.”  The suede glove came forward, and was buried in his handshake.  He understood it to be an unvoiced apology of its owner for her suspicions, and his instinct was correct. For how could her doubts hold their ground when he had showed himself a sharer in her secret and a guardian of it? And how could anything sinister lie behind those frank, unwavering eyes or consist with that long, clean stride that was carrying him so forcefully to the vestibule?  At Apache no telegrams were found waiting for those who had been expecting them. Communication with the division superintendent at Tucson uncovered the fact that no message of the hold-up had yet reached him. It was an easy guess for Collins to find the reason.  “We’re in the infant class, major,” he told Mackenzie, with a sardonic laugh. “Leroy must have galloped down the line direct to the station after the hold-up. Likely enough he went into the depot just as we went out. That gives him the other hour or two he needs to make his getaway with the loot. Well, it can’t be helped now. If I can only reach Bucky there’s one chance in fifty he can head them off from crossing into Sonora. Soon as I can get together a posse I’ll take up the trail from the point of the hold-up. But they’ll have a whole night’s start on me. That’s a big handicap.”  From Apache Collins sent three dispatches. One was to his deputy, Dillon, at Tucson. It read:  “Get together at once posse of four and outfit same for four days.”  Another went to Sabin, the division superintendent:  “Order special to carry posse with horses from Tucson to Big Gap. Must leave by midnight. Have track clear.”  The third was a notification to Lieutenant O’Connor, of the Arizona Rangers, of the hold-up, specifying time and place of the occurrence. The sheriff knew it was not necessary to add that the bandits were probably heading south to get into Sonora. Bucky would take that for granted and do his best to cover the likely spots of the frontier.  It was nearly eleven when the Limited drew in to Tucson. Sabin was on the platform anxiously awaiting their arrival. Collins reached him even before the conductor.  “Ordered the special, Mr. Sabin?” he asked, in a low voice.  The railroad man was chewing nervously on an unlit cigar. “Yes, sheriff. You want only an engine and one car, I suppose.”  “That will be enough. I’ve got to go uptown now and meet Dillon. Midnight sharp, please.”  “Do you know how much they got?” Sabin whispered.  “Thirty thousand, I hear, besides what they took from the passengers. The conductor will tell you all about it. I’ve got to jump to be ready.”  A disappointment awaited him in the telegrapher’s room at the depot. He found a wire, but not from the person he expected. The ranger in charge at Douglas said that Lieutenant O’Connor was at Flagstaff, but pending that officer’s return he would put himself under the orders of Sheriff Collins and wait for instructions.  The sheriff whistled softly to himself and scratched his head. Bucky would not have waited for instructions. By this time that live wire would have finished telephoning all over Southern Arizona and would himself have been in the saddle. But Bucky in Flagstaff, nearly three hundred miles from the battlefield, so far as the present emergency went, might just as well be in Calcutta. Collins wired instructions to the ranger and sent a third message to the lieutenant.  “I expect I’ll hear this time he’s skipped over to Winslow,” he told himself, with a rueful grin.  The special with the posse on board drew out at midnight sharp. It reached the scene of the holdup before daybreak. The loading board was lowered and the horses led from the car and picketed. Meanwhile two of the men lit a fire and made breakfast while the others unloaded the outfit and packed for the trail. The first faint streaks of gray dawn were beginning to fleck the sky when Collins and Dillon, with a lantern, moved along the railroad bed to the little clump of cottonwoods where the outlaws had probably lain while they waited for the express. They scanned this ground inch by inch. The coals where their camp-fire had been were still alive. Broken bits of food lay scattered about. Half-trampled into the ground the sheriff picked up a narrow gold chain and locket. This last he opened, and found it to contain a tiny photograph of a young mother and babe, both laughing happily. A close search failed to disclose anything else of interest.  They returned to their companions, ate breakfast, and saddled. It was by this time light enough to be moving. The trail was easy as a printed map, for the object of the outlaws had been haste rather than secrecy. The posse covered it swiftly and without hesitation.  “Now, I wonder why this trail don’t run straight south instead of bearing to the left into the hills. Looks like they’re going to cache their stolen gold up in the mountains before they risk crossing into Sonora. They figure Bucky’ll be on the lookout for them,” the sheriff said to his deputy.  “I believe you’ve guessed it, Val. Stands to reason they’ll want to get rid of the loot soon as they can. Oh, hell!”  Dillon’s disgust proved justifiable, for the trail had lost itself in a mountain stream, up or down which the outlaws must have filed. A month later and the creek would have been dry. But it was still spring. The mountain rains had not ceased feeding the brook, and of this the outlaws had taken advantage to wipe out their trail.  The sheriff looked anxiously at the sky. “It’s fixin’ to rain, Jim. Don’t that beat the Dutch? If it does, that lets us out plenty.”  The men they were after might have gone either upstream or down. It was impossible to know definitely which, nor was there time to follow both. Already big drops of rain were splashing down.  “We’ll take a chance, and go up. They’re probably up in the hills somewhere right now,” said Collins, with characteristic decision.  He had guessed right. A mile farther upstream horses had clambered to the bank and struck deeper into the hills. But already rain was falling in a brisk shower. The posse had not gone another quarter of a mile before the trail was washed out. They were now in a rough and rocky country getting every minute steeper.  “It’s going to be like lookin’ for a needle in a haystack, Val,” Dillon growled.  Collins nodded. “We ain’t got one chance in a hundred, Jim, but I reckon we’ll take that chance.”  For three days they blundered around in the hills before they gave it up. The first night, about dusk, the pursuers were without knowing it so warm that one of the bandits lay with his rifle on a rock rim not a stone’s throw above them as they wound through a little ravine. But Collins got no glimpse of the robbers. At last he reluctantly gave the word to turn back. Probably the men he wanted had already slipped down to the plains and across to Mexico. If not, they might play hide and seek with him a month in the recesses of these unknown mountains.  Next morning the sheriff struck a telephone wire, tapped it, got Sabin on the line, told him of his failure and that he was returning to Tucson. About the middle of the afternoon the dispirited posse reached its sidetracked special.  A young man lay stretched full length on the loading board, with a broad-brimmed felt hat over his eyes. He wore a gray flannel shirt and corduroy trousers thrust into half-leg laced boots. At the sound of voices he turned lazily on his side and watched the members of the posse swing wearily from their saddles. An amiable smile, not wholly free of friendly derision, lit his good-looking face.  “Oh, you sheriff,” he drawled.  Collins swung round, as if he had been pricked with a knife point. He stared an instant before he let out a shout of welcome and fell upon the youth.  “Bucky, by thunder!”  The latter got up nimbly in time to be hospitably thumped and punched. He was a lithe, slender young fellow, of medium height, and he carried himself lightly with that manner of sunburned competency given only by the rough-and-tumble life of the outdoors West.  While the men reloaded the car he and the sheriff stood apart and t