******************************************************************* THIS EBOOK WAS ONE OF PROJECT GUTENBERG'S EARLY FILES PRODUCED AT A TIME WHEN PROOFING METHODS AND TOOLS WERE NOT WELL DEVELOPED. THERE IS AN IMPROVED EDITION OF THIS TITLE WHICH MAY BE VIEWED AS EBOOK (#100) at https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/100 *******************************************************************     The first Part of Henry the Sixt  Actus Primus. Scoena Prima.  Dead March.  Enter the Funerall of King Henry the Fift, attended on by the Duke of Bedford, Regent of France; the Duke of Gloster, Protector; the Duke of Exeter Warwicke, the Bishop of Winchester, and the Duke of Somerset.    Bedford. Hung be y heauens with black, yield day to night; Comets importing change of Times and States, Brandish your crystall Tresses in the Skie, And with them scourge the bad reuolting Stars, That haue consented vnto Henries death: King Henry the Fift, too famous to liue long, England ne're lost a King of so much worth     Glost. England ne're had a King vntill his time: Vertue he had, deseruing to command, His brandisht Sword did blinde men with his beames, His Armes spred wider then a Dragons Wings: His sparkling Eyes, repleat with wrathfull fire, More dazled and droue back his Enemies, Then mid-day Sunne, fierce bent against their faces. What should I say? his Deeds exceed all speech: He ne're lift vp his Hand, but conquered     Exe. We mourne in black, why mourn we not in blood? Henry is dead, and neuer shall reuiue: Vpon a Woodden Coffin we attend; And Deaths dishonourable Victorie, We with our stately presence glorifie, Like Captiues bound to a Triumphant Carre. What? shall we curse the Planets of Mishap, That plotted thus our Glories ouerthrow? Or shall we thinke the subtile-witted French, Coniurers and Sorcerers, that afraid of him, By Magick Verses haue contriu'd his end     Winch. He was a King, blest of the King of Kings. Vnto the French, the dreadfull Iudgement-Day So dreadfull will not be, as was his sight. The Battailes of the Lord of Hosts he fought: The Churches Prayers made him so prosperous     Glost. The Church? where is it? Had not Church-men pray'd, His thred of Life had not so soone decay'd. None doe you like, but an effeminate Prince, Whom like a Schoole-boy you may ouer-awe     Winch. Gloster, what ere we like, thou art Protector, And lookest to command the Prince and Realme. Thy Wife is prowd, she holdeth thee in awe, More then God or Religious Church-men may     Glost. Name not Religion, for thou lou'st the Flesh, And ne're throughout the yeere to Church thou go'st, Except it be to pray against thy foes     Bed. Cease, cease these Iarres, & rest your minds in peace: Let's to the Altar: Heralds wayt on vs; In stead of Gold, wee'le offer vp our Armes, Since Armes auayle not, now that Henry's dead, Posteritie await for wretched yeeres, When at their Mothers moistned eyes, Babes shall suck, Our Ile be made a Nourish of salt Teares, And none but Women left to wayle the dead. Henry the Fift, thy Ghost I inuocate: Prosper this Realme, keepe it from Ciuill Broyles, Combat with aduerse Planets in the Heauens; A farre more glorious Starre thy Soule will make, Then Iulius CÊsar, or bright- Enter a Messenger.    Mess. My honourable Lords, health to you all: Sad tidings bring I to you out of France, Of losse, of slaughter, and discomfiture: Guyen, Champaigne, Rheimes, Orleance, Paris Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost     Bedf. What say'st thou man, before dead Henry's Coarse? Speake softly, or the losse of those great Townes Will make him burst his Lead, and rise from death     Glost. Is Paris lost? is Roan yeelded vp? If Henry were recall'd to life againe, These news would cause him once more yeeld the Ghost     Exe. How were they lost? what trecherie was vs'd?   Mess. No trecherie, but want of Men and Money. Amongst the Souldiers this is muttered, That here you maintaine seuerall Factions: And whil'st a Field should be dispatcht and fought, You are disputing of your Generals. One would haue lingring Warres, with little cost; Another would flye swift, but wanteth Wings: A third thinkes, without expence at all, By guilefull faire words, Peace may be obtayn'd. Awake, awake, English Nobilitie, Let not slouth dimme your Honors, new begot; Cropt are the Flower-de-Luces in your Armes Of Englands Coat, one halfe is cut away     Exe. Were our Teares wanting to this Funerall, These Tidings would call forth her flowing Tides     Bedf. Me they concerne, Regent I am of France: Giue me my steeled Coat, Ile fight for France. Away with these disgracefull wayling Robes; Wounds will I lend the French, in stead of Eyes, To weepe their intermissiue Miseries. Enter to them another Messenger.    Mess. Lords view these Letters, full of bad mischance. France is reuolted from the English quite, Except some petty Townes, of no import. The Dolphin Charles is crowned King in Rheimes: The Bastard of Orleance with him is ioyn'd: Reynold, Duke of Aniou, doth take his part, The Duke of Alanson flyeth to his side. Enter.    Exe. The Dolphin crown'd King? all flye to him? O whither shall we flye from this reproach?   Glost. We will not flye, but to our enemies throats. Bedford, if thou be slacke, Ile fight it out     Bed. Gloster, why doubtst thou of my forwardnesse? An Army haue I muster'd in my thoughts, Wherewith already France is ouer-run. Enter another Messenger.    Mes. My gracious Lords, to adde to your laments, Wherewith you now bedew King Henries hearse, I must informe you of a dismall fight, Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot, and the French     Win. What? wherein Talbot ouercame, is't so?   3.Mes. O no: wherein Lord Talbot was o'rethrown: The circumstance Ile tell you more at large. The tenth of August last, this dreadfull Lord, Retyring from the Siege of Orleance, Hauing full scarce six thousand in his troupe, By three and twentie thousand of the French Was round incompassed, and set vpon: No leysure had he to enranke his men. He wanted Pikes to set before his Archers: In stead whereof, sharpe Stakes pluckt out of Hedges They pitched in the ground confusedly, To keepe the Horsemen off, from breaking in. More then three houres the fight continued: Where valiant Talbot, aboue humane thought, Enacted wonders with his Sword and Lance. Hundreds he sent to Hell, and none durst stand him: Here, there, and euery where enrag'd, he slew. The French exclaym'd, the Deuill was in Armes, All the whole Army stood agaz'd on him. His Souldiers spying his vndaunted Spirit, A Talbot, a Talbot, cry'd out amaine, And rusht into the Bowels of the Battaile. Here had the Conquest fully been seal'd vp, If Sir Iohn Falstaffe had not play'd the Coward. He being in the Vauward, plac't behinde, With purpose to relieue and follow them, Cowardly fled, not hauing struck one stroake. Hence grew the generall wrack and massacre: Enclosed were they with their Enemies. A base Wallon, to win the Dolphins grace, Thrust Talbot with a Speare into the Back, Whom all France, with their chiefe assembled strength, Durst not presume to looke once in the face     Bedf. Is Talbot slaine then? I will slay my selfe, For liuing idly here, in pompe and ease, Whil'st such a worthy Leader, wanting ayd, Vnto his dastard foe-men is betray'd     3.Mess. O no, he liues, but is tooke Prisoner, And Lord Scales with him, and Lord Hungerford: Most of the rest slaughter'd, or tooke likewise     Bedf. His Ransome there is none but I shall pay. Ile hale the Dolphin headlong from his Throne, His Crowne shall be the Ransome of my friend: Foure of their Lords Ile change for one of ours. Farwell my Masters, to my Taske will I, Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make, To keepe our great Saint Georges Feast withall. Ten thousand Souldiers with me I will take, Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake     3.Mess. So you had need, for Orleance is besieg'd, The English Army is growne weake and faint: The Earle of Salisbury craueth supply, And hardly keepes his men from mutinie, Since they so few, watch such a multitude     Exe. Remember Lords your Oathes to Henry sworne: Eyther to quell the Dolphin vtterly, Or bring him in obedience to your yoake     Bedf. I doe remember it, and here take my leaue, To goe about my preparation.  Exit Bedford.    Glost. Ile to the Tower with all the hast I can, To view th' Artillerie and Munition, And then I will proclayme young Henry King.  Exit Gloster.    Exe. To Eltam will I, where the young King is, Being ordayn'd his speciall Gouernor, And for his safetie there Ile best deuise. Enter.    Winch. Each hath his Place and Function to attend: I am left out; for me nothing remaines: But long I will not be Iack out of Office. The King from Eltam I intend to send, And sit at chiefest Sterne of publique Weale. Enter.  Sound a Flourish.  Enter Charles, Alanson, and Reigneir, marching with Drum and Souldiers.    Charles. Mars his true mouing, euen as in the Heauens, So in the Earth, to this day is not knowne. Late did he shine vpon the English side: Now we are Victors, vpon vs he smiles. What Townes of any moment, but we haue? At pleasure here we lye, neere Orleance: Otherwhiles, the famisht English, like pale Ghosts, Faintly besiege vs one houre in a moneth     Alan. They want their Porredge, & their fat Bul Beeues: Eyther they must be dyeted like Mules, And haue their Prouender ty'd to their mouthes, Or pitteous they will looke, like drowned Mice     Reigneir. Let's rayse the Siege: why liue we idly here? Talbot is taken, whom we wont to feare: Remayneth none but mad-brayn'd Salisbury, And he may well in fretting spend his gall, Nor men nor Money hath he to make Warre     Charles. Sound, sound Alarum, we will rush on them. Now for the honour of the forlorne French: Him I forgiue my death, that killeth me, When he sees me goe back one foot, or flye.  Exeunt.  Here Alarum, they are beaten back by the English, with great losse.  Enter Charles, Alanson, and Reigneir.    Charles. Who euer saw the like? what men haue I? Dogges, Cowards, Dastards: I would ne're haue fled, But that they left me 'midst my Enemies     Reigneir. Salisbury is a desperate Homicide, He fighteth as one weary of his life: The other Lords, like Lyons wanting foode, Doe rush vpon vs as their hungry prey     Alanson. Froysard, a Countreyman of ours, records, England all Oliuers and Rowlands breed, During the time Edward the third did raigne: More truly now may this be verified; For none but Samsons and Goliasses It sendeth forth to skirmish: one to tenne? Leane raw-bon'd Rascals, who would e'er suppose, They had such courage and audacitie?   Charles. Let's leaue this Towne, For they are hayre-brayn'd Slaues, And hunger will enforce them to be more eager: Of old I know them; rather with their Teeth The Walls they'le teare downe, then forsake the Siege     Reigneir. I thinke by some odde Gimmors or Deuice Their Armes are set, like Clocks, still to strike on; Else ne're could they hold out so as they doe: By my consent, wee'le euen let them alone     Alanson. Be it so. Enter the Bastard of Orleance.    Bastard. Where's the Prince Dolphin? I haue newes for him     Dolph. Bastard of Orleance, thrice welcome to vs     Bast. Me thinks your looks are sad, your chear appal'd. Hath the late ouerthrow wrought this offence? Be not dismay'd, for succour is at hand: A holy Maid hither with me I bring, Which by a Vision sent to her from Heauen, Ordayned is to rayse this tedious Siege, And driue the English forth the bounds of France: The spirit of deepe Prophecie she hath, Exceeding the nine Sibyls of old Rome: What's past, and what's to come, she can descry. Speake, shall I call her in? beleeue my words, For they are certaine, and vnfallible     Dolph. Goe call her in: but first, to try her skill, Reignier stand thou as Dolphin in my place; Question her prowdly, let thy Lookes be sterne, By this meanes shall we sound what skill she hath. Enter Ioane Puzel.    Reigneir. Faire Maid, is't thou wilt doe these wondrous feats?   Puzel. Reignier, is't thou that thinkest to beguile me? Where is the Dolphin? Come, come from behinde, I know thee well, though neuer seene before. Be not amaz'd, there's nothing hid from me; In priuate will I talke with thee apart: Stand back you Lords, and giue vs leaue a while     Reigneir. She takes vpon her brauely at first dash     Puzel. Dolphin, I am by birth a Shepheards Daughter, My wit vntrayn'd in any kind of Art: Heauen and our Lady gracious hath it pleas'd To shine on my contemptible estate. Loe, whilest I wayted on my tender Lambes, And to Sunnes parching heat display'd my cheekes, Gods Mother deigned to appeare to me, And in a Vision full of Maiestie, Will'd me to leaue my base Vocation, And free my Countrey from Calamitie: Her ayde she promis'd, and assur'd successe. In compleat Glory shee reueal'd her selfe: And whereas I was black and swart before, With those cleare Rayes, which shee infus'd on me, That beautie am I blest with, which you may see. Aske me what question thou canst possible, And I will answer vnpremeditated: My Courage trie by Combat, if thou dar'st, And thou shalt finde that I exceed my Sex. Resolue on this, thou shalt be fortunate, If thou receiue me for thy Warlike Mate     Dolph. Thou hast astonisht me with thy high termes: Onely this proofe Ile of thy Valour make, In single Combat thou shalt buckle with me; And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true, Otherwise I renounce all confidence     Puzel. I am prepar'd: here is my keene-edg'd Sword, Deckt with fine Flower-de-Luces on each side, The which at Touraine, in S[aint]. Katherines Church-yard, Out of a great deale of old Iron, I chose forth     Dolph. Then come a Gods name, I feare no woman     Puzel. And while I liue, Ile ne're flye from a man.  Here they fight, and Ioane de Puzel ouercomes.    Dolph. Stay, stay thy hands, thou art an Amazon, And fightest with the Sword of Debora     Puzel. Christs Mother helpes me, else I were too weake     Dolph. Who e're helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me: Impatiently I burne with thy desire, My heart and hands thou hast at once subdu'd. Excellent Puzel, if thy name be so, Let me thy seruant, and not Soueraigne be, 'Tis the French Dolphin sueth to thee thus     Puzel. I must not yeeld to any rights of Loue, For my Profession's sacred from aboue: When I haue chased all thy Foes from hence, Then will I thinke vpon a recompence     Dolph. Meane time looke gracious on thy prostrate Thrall     Reigneir. My Lord me thinkes is very long in talke     Alans. Doubtlesse he shriues this woman to her smock, Else ne're could he so long protract his speech     Reigneir. Shall wee disturbe him, since hee keepes no meane?   Alan. He may meane more then we poor men do know, These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues     Reigneir. My Lord, where are you? what deuise you on? Shall we giue o're Orleance, or no?   Puzel. Why no, I say: distrustfull Recreants, Fight till the last gaspe: Ile be your guard     Dolph. What shee sayes, Ile confirme: wee'le fight it out     Puzel. Assign'd am I to be the English Scourge. This night the Siege assuredly Ile rayse: Expect Saint Martins Summer, Halcyons dayes, Since I haue entred into these Warres. Glory is like a Circle in the Water, Which neuer ceaseth to enlarge it selfe, Till by broad spreading, it disperse to naught. With Henries death, the English Circle ends, Dispersed are the glories it included: Now am I like that prowd insulting Ship, Which CÊsar and his fortune bare at once     Dolph. Was Mahomet inspired with a Doue? Thou with an Eagle art inspired then. Helen, the Mother of Great Constantine, Nor yet S[aint]. Philips daughters were like thee. Bright Starre of Venus, falne downe on the Earth, How may I reuerently worship thee enough?   Alanson. Leaue off delayes, and let vs rayse the Siege     Reigneir. Woman, do what thou canst to saue our honors, Driue them from Orleance, and be immortaliz'd     Dolph. Presently wee'le try: come, let's away about it, No Prophet will I trust, if shee proue false.  Exeunt.  Enter Gloster, with his Seruing-men.    Glost. I am come to suruey the Tower this day; Since Henries death, I feare there is Conueyance: Where be these Warders, that they wait not here? Open the Gates, 'tis Gloster that calls     1.Warder. Who's there, that knocks so imperiously?   Glost.1.Man. It is the Noble Duke of Gloster     2.Warder. Who ere he be, you may not be let in     1.Man. Villaines, answer you so the Lord Protector?   1.Warder. The Lord protect him, so we answer him, We doe no otherwise then wee are will'd     Glost. Who willed you? or whose will stands but mine? There's none Protector of the Realme, but I: Breake vp the Gates, Ile be your warrantize; Shall I be flowted thus by dunghill Groomes?  Glosters men rush at the Tower Gates, and Wooduile the Lieutenant speakes within.    Wooduile. What noyse is this? what Traytors haue wee here?   Glost. Lieutenant, is it you whose voyce I heare? Open the Gates, here's Gloster that would enter     Wooduile. Haue patience Noble Duke, I may not open, The Cardinall of Winchester forbids: From him I haue expresse commandement, That thou nor none of thine shall be let in     Glost. Faint-hearted Wooduile, prizest him 'fore me? Arrogant Winchester, that haughtie Prelate, Whom Henry our late Soueraigne ne're could brooke? Thou art no friend to God, or to the King: Open the Gates, or Ile shut thee out shortly     Seruingmen. Open the Gates vnto the Lord Protector, Or wee'le burst them open, if that you come not quickly. Enter to the Protector at the Tower Gates, Winchester and his men in Tawney Coates.    Winchest. How now ambitious Vmpheir, what meanes this?   Glost. Piel'd Priest, doo'st thou command me to be shut out?   Winch. I doe, thou most vsurping Proditor, And not Protector of the King or Realme     Glost. Stand back thou manifest Conspirator, Thou that contriued'st to murther our dead Lord, Thou that giu'st Whores Indulgences to sinne, Ile canuas thee in thy broad Cardinalls Hat, If thou proceed in this thy insolence     Winch. Nay, stand thou back, I will not budge a foot: This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain, To slay thy Brother Abel, if thou wilt     Glost. I will not slay thee, but Ile driue thee back: Thy Scarlet Robes, as a Childs bearing Cloth, Ile vse, to carry thee out of this place     Winch. Doe what thou dar'st, I beard thee to thy face     Glost. What? am I dar'd, and bearded to my face? Draw men, for all this priuiledged place, Blew Coats to Tawny Coats. Priest, beware your Beard, I meane to tugge it, and to cuffe you soundly. Vnder my feet I stampe thy Cardinalls Hat: In spight of Pope, or dignities of Church, Here by the Cheekes Ile drag thee vp and downe     Winch. Gloster, thou wilt answere this before the Pope     Glost. Winchester Goose, I cry, a Rope, a Rope. Now beat them hence, why doe you let them stay? Thee Ile chase hence, thou Wolfe in Sheepes array. Out Tawney-Coates, out Scarlet Hypocrite.  Here Glosters men beat out the Cardinalls men, and enter in the hurly-burly the Maior of London, and his Officers.    Maior. Fye Lords, that you being supreme Magistrates, Thus contumeliously should breake the Peace     Glost. Peace Maior, thou know'st little of my wrongs: Here's Beauford, that regards nor God nor King, Hath here distrayn'd the Tower to his vse     Winch. Here's Gloster, a Foe to Citizens, One that still motions Warre, and neuer Peace, O're-charging your free Purses with large Fines; That seekes to ouerthrow Religion, Because he is Protector of the Realme; And would haue Armour here out of the Tower, To Crowne himselfe King, and suppresse the Prince     Glost. I will not answer thee with words, but blowes.  Here they skirmish againe.    Maior. Naught rests for me, in this tumultuous strife, But to make open Proclamation. Come Officer, as lowd as e're thou canst, cry: All manner of men, assembled here in Armes this day, against Gods Peace and the Kings, wee charge and command you, in his Highnesse Name, to repayre to your seuerall dwelling places, and not to weare, handle, or vse any Sword, Weapon, or Dagger hence-forward, vpon paine of death     Glost. Cardinall, Ile be no breaker of the Law: But we shall meet, and breake our minds at large     Winch. Gloster, wee'le meet to thy cost, be sure: Thy heart-blood I will haue for this dayes worke     Maior. Ile call for Clubs, if you will not away: This Cardinall's more haughtie then the Deuill     Glost. Maior farewell: thou doo'st but what thou may'st     Winch. Abhominable Gloster, guard thy Head, For I intend to haue it ere long.  Exeunt.    Maior. See the Coast clear'd, and then we will depart. Good God, these Nobles should such stomacks beare, I my selfe fight not once in fortie yeere.  Exeunt.  Enter the Master Gunner of Orleance, and his Boy.    M.Gunner. Sirrha, thou know'st how Orleance is besieg'd, And how the English haue the Suburbs wonne     Boy. Father I know, and oft haue shot at them, How e're vnfortunate, I miss'd my ayme     M.Gunner. But now thou shalt not. Be thou rul'd by me: Chiefe Master Gunner am I of this Towne, Something I must doe to procure me grace: The Princes espyals haue informed me, How the English, in the Suburbs close entrencht, Went through a secret Grate of Iron Barres, In yonder Tower, to ouer-peere the Citie, And thence discouer, how with most aduantage They may vex vs with Shot or with Assault. To intercept this inconuenience, A Peece of Ordnance 'gainst it I haue plac'd, And euen these three dayes haue I watcht, If I could see them. Now doe thou watch, For I can stay no longer. If thou spy'st any, runne and bring me word, And thou shalt finde me at the Gouernors. Enter.    Boy. Father, I warrant you, take you no care, Ile neuer trouble you, if I may spye them. Enter.  Enter Salisbury and Talbot on the Turrets, with others.    Salisb. Talbot, my life, my ioy, againe return'd? How wert thou handled, being Prisoner? Or by what meanes got's thou to be releas'd? Discourse I prethee on this Turrets top     Talbot. The Earle of Bedford had a Prisoner, Call'd the braue Lord Ponton de Santrayle, For him was I exchang'd, and ransom'd. But with a baser man of Armes by farre, Once in contempt they would haue barter'd me: Which I disdaining, scorn'd, and craued death, Rather then I would be so pil'd esteem'd: In fine, redeem'd I was as I desir'd. But O, the trecherous Falstaffe wounds my heart, Whom with my bare fists I would execute, If I now had him brought into my power     Salisb. Yet tell'st thou not, how thou wert entertain'd     Tal. With scoffes and scornes, and contumelious taunts, In open Market-place produc't they me, To be a publique spectacle to all: Here, sayd they, is the Terror of the French, The Scar-Crow that affrights our Children so. Then broke I from the Officers that led me, And with my nayles digg'd stones out of the ground, To hurle at the beholders of my shame. My grisly countenance made others flye, None durst come neere, for feare of suddaine death. In Iron Walls they deem'd me not secure: So great feare of my Name 'mongst them were spread, That they suppos'd I could rend Barres of Steele, And spurne in pieces Posts of Adamant. Wherefore a guard of chosen Shot I had, That walkt about me euery Minute while: And if I did but stirre out of my Bed, Ready they were to shoot me to the heart. Enter the Boy with a Linstock.    Salisb. I grieue to heare what torments you endur'd, But we will be reueng'd sufficiently. Now it is Supper time in Orleance: Here, through this Grate, I count each one, And view the Frenchmen how they fortifie: Let vs looke in, the sight will much delight thee: Sir Thomas Gargraue, and Sir William Glansdale, Let me haue your expresse opinions, Where is best place to make our Batt'ry next?   Gargraue. I thinke at the North Gate, for there stands Lords     Glansdale. And I heere, at the Bulwarke of the Bridge     Talb. For ought I see, this Citie must be famisht, Or with light Skirmishes enfeebled.  Here they shot, and Salisbury falls downe.    Salisb. O Lord haue mercy on vs, wretched sinners     Gargraue. O Lord haue mercy on me, wofull man     Talb. What chance is this, that suddenly hath crost vs? Speake Salisbury; at least, if thou canst, speake: How far'st thou, Mirror of all Martiall men? One of thy Eyes, and thy Cheekes side struck off? Accursed Tower, accursed fatall Hand, That hath contriu'd this wofull Tragedie. In thirteene Battailes, Salisbury o'recame: Henry the Fift he first trayn'd to the Warres. Whil'st any Trumpe did sound, or Drum struck vp, His Sword did ne're leaue striking in the field. Yet liu'st thou Salisbury? though thy speech doth fayle, One Eye thou hast to looke to Heauen for grace. The Sunne with one Eye vieweth all the World. Heauen be thou gracious to none aliue, If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands. Beare hence his Body, I will helpe to bury it. Sir Thomas Gargraue, hast thou any life? Speake vnto Talbot, nay, looke vp to him. Salisbury cheare thy Spirit with this comfort, Thou shalt not dye whiles- He beckens with his hand, and smiles on me: As who should say, When I am dead and gone, Remember to auenge me on the French. Plantaginet I will, and like thee, Play on the Lute, beholding the Townes burne: Wretched shall France be onely in my Name.  Here an Alarum, and it Thunders and Lightens.  What stirre is this? what tumult's in the Heauens? Whence commeth this Alarum, and the noyse? Enter a Messenger.    Mess. My Lord, my Lord, the French haue gather'd head. The Dolphin, with one Ioane de Puzel ioyn'd, A holy Prophetesse, new risen vp, Is come with a great Power, to rayse the Siege.  Here Salisbury lifteth himselfe vp, and groanes.    Talb. Heare, heare, how dying Salisbury doth groane, It irkes his heart he cannot be reueng'd. Frenchmen, Ile be a Salisbury to you. Puzel or Pussel, Dolphin or Dog-fish, Your hearts Ile stampe out with my Horses heeles, And make a Quagmire of your mingled braines. Conuey me Salisbury into his Tent, And then wee'le try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.  Alarum. Exeunt.  Here an Alarum againe, and Talbot pursueth the Dolphin, and driueth him: Then enter Ioane de Puzel, driuing Englishmen before her. Then enter Talbot.    Talb. Where is my strength, my valour, and my force? Our English Troupes retyre, I cannot stay them, A Woman clad in Armour chaseth them. Enter Puzel.  Here, here shee comes. Ile haue a bowt with thee: Deuill, or Deuils Dam, Ile coniure thee: Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a Witch, And straightway giue thy Soule to him thou seru'st     Puzel. Come, come, 'tis onely I that must disgrace thee.  Here they fight.    Talb. Heauens, can you suffer Hell so to preuayle? My brest Ile burst with straining of my courage, And from my shoulders crack my Armes asunder, But I will chastise this high-minded Strumpet.  They fight againe.    Puzel. Talbot farwell, thy houre is not yet come, I must goe Victuall Orleance forthwith:  A short Alarum: then enter the Towne with Souldiers.  O're-take me if thou canst, I scorne thy strength. Goe, goe, cheare vp thy hungry-starued men, Helpe Salisbury to make his Testament, This Day is ours, as many more shall be. Enter.    Talb. My thoughts are whirled like a Potters Wheele, I know not where I am, nor what I doe: A Witch by feare, not force, like Hannibal, Driues back our troupes, and conquers as she lists: So Bees with smoake, and Doues with noysome stench, Are from their Hyues and Houses driuen away. They call'd vs, for our fiercenesse, English Dogges, Now like to Whelpes, we crying runne away.  A short Alarum.  Hearke Countreymen, eyther renew the fight, Or teare the Lyons out of Englands Coat; Renounce your Soyle, giue Sheepe in Lyons stead: Sheepe run not halfe so trecherous from the Wolfe, Or Horse or Oxen from the Leopard, As you flye from your oft-subdued slaues.  Alarum. Here another Skirmish.  It will not be, retyre into your Trenches: You all consented vnto Salisburies death, For none would strike a stroake in his reuenge. Puzel is entred into Orleance, In spight of vs, or ought that we could doe. O would I were to dye with Salisbury, The shame hereof, will make me hide my head.  Exit Talbot.  Alarum, Retreat, Flourish.  Enter on the Walls, Puzel, Dolphin, Reigneir, Alanson, and Souldiers.    Puzel. Aduance our wauing Colours on the Walls, Rescu'd is Orleance from the English. Thus Ioane de Puzel hath perform'd her word     Dolph. Diuinest Creature, Astrea's Daughter, How shall I honour thee for this successe? Thy promises are like Adonis Garden, That one day bloom'd, and fruitfull were the next. France, triumph in thy glorious Prophetesse, Recouer'd is the Towne of Orleance, More blessed hap did ne're befall our State     Reigneir. Why ring not out the Bells alowd, Throughout the Towne? Dolphin command the Citizens make Bonfires, And feast and banquet in the open streets, To celebrate the ioy that God hath giuen vs     Alans. All France will be repleat with mirth and ioy, When they shall heare how we haue play'd the men     Dolph. 'Tis Ioane, not we, by whom the day is wonne: For which, I will diuide my Crowne with her, And all the Priests and Fryers in my Realme, Shall in procession sing her endlesse prayse. A statelyer Pyramis to her Ile reare, Then Rhodophe's or Memphis euer was. In memorie of her, when she is dead, Her Ashes, in an Vrne more precious Then the rich-iewel'd Coffer of Darius, Transported, shall be at high Festiuals Before the Kings and Queenes of France. No longer on Saint Dennis will we cry, But Ioane de Puzel shall be France's Saint. Come in, and let vs Banquet Royally, After this Golden Day of Victorie.  Flourish. Exeunt.   Actus Secundus. Scena Prima.  Enter a Sergeant of a Band, with two Sentinels.    Ser. Sirs, take your places, and be vigilant: If any noyse or Souldier you perceiue Neere to the walles, by some apparant signe Let vs haue knowledge at the Court of Guard     Sent. Sergeant you shall. Thus are poore Seruitors (When others sleepe vpon their quiet beds) Constrain'd to watch in darknesse, raine, and cold. Enter Talbot, Bedford, and Burgundy, with scaling Ladders: Their Drummes beating a Dead March.    Tal. Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy, By whose approach, the Regions of Artoys, Wallon, and Picardy, are friends to vs: This happy night, the Frenchmen are secure, Hauing all day carows'd and banquetted, Embrace we then this opportunitie, As fitting best to quittance their deceite, Contriu'd by Art, and balefull Sorcerie     Bed. Coward of France, how much he wrongs his fame, Dispairing of his owne armes fortitude, To ioyne with Witches, and the helpe of Hell     Bur. Traitors haue neuer other company. But what's that Puzell whom they tearme so pure?   Tal. A Maid, they say     Bed. A Maid? And be so martiall?   Bur. Pray God she proue not masculine ere long: If vnderneath the Standard of the French She carry Armour, as she hath begun     Tal. Well, let them practise and conuerse with spirits. God is our Fortresse, in whose conquering name Let vs resolue to scale their flinty bulwarkes     Bed. Ascend braue Talbot, we will follow thee     Tal. Not altogether: Better farre I guesse, That we do make our entrance seuerall wayes: That if it chance the one of vs do faile, The other yet may rise against their force     Bed. Agreed; Ile to yond corner     Bur. And I to this     Tal. And heere will Talbot mount, or make his graue. Now Salisbury, for thee and for the right Of English Henry, shall this night appeare How much in duty, I am bound to both     Sent. Arme, arme, the enemy doth make assault.  Cry, S[aint]. George, A Talbot.  The French leape ore the walles in their shirts. Enter seuerall wayes, Bastard, Alanson, Reignier, halfe ready, and halfe vnready.    Alan. How now my Lords? what all vnreadie so?   Bast. Vnready? I and glad we scap'd so well     Reig. 'Twas time (I trow) to wake and leaue our beds, Hearing Alarums at our Chamber doores     Alan. Of all exploits since first I follow'd Armes, Nere heard I of a warlike enterprize More venturous, or desperate then this     Bast. I thinke this Talbot be a Fiend of Hell     Reig. If not of Hell, the Heauens sure fauour him     Alans. Here commeth Charles, I maruell how he sped? Enter Charles and Ioane.    Bast. Tut, holy Ioane was his defensiue Guard     Charl. Is this thy cunning, thou deceitfull Dame? Didst thou at first, to flatter vs withall, Make vs partakers of a little gayne, That now our losse might be ten times so much?   Ioane. Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend? At all times will you haue my Power alike? Sleeping or waking, must I still preuayle, Or will you blame and lay the fault on me? Improuident Souldiors, had your Watch been good, This sudden Mischiefe neuer could haue falne     Charl. Duke of Alanson, this was your default, That being Captaine of the Watch to Night, Did looke no better to that weightie Charge     Alans. Had all your Quarters been as safely kept, As that whereof I had the gouernment, We had not beene thus shamefully surpriz'd     Bast. Mine was secure     Reig. And so was mine, my Lord     Charl. And for my selfe, most part of all this Night Within her Quarter, and mine owne Precinct, I was imploy'd in passing to and fro, About relieuing of the Centinels. Then how, or which way, should they first breake in?   Ioane. Question (my Lords) no further of the case, How or which way; 'tis sure they found some place, But weakely guarded, where the breach was made: And now there rests no other shift but this, To gather our Souldiors, scatter'd and disperc't, And lay new Platformes to endammage them.  Exeunt.  Alarum. Enter a Souldier, crying, a Talbot, a Talbot: they flye, leauing their Clothes behind.    Sould. Ile be so bold to take what they haue left: The Cry of Talbot serues me for a Sword, For I haue loaden me with many Spoyles, Vsing no other Weapon but his Name. Enter.  Enter Talbot, Bedford, Burgundie.    Bedf. The Day begins to breake, and Night is fled, Whose pitchy Mantle ouer-vayl'd the Earth. Here sound Retreat, and cease our hot pursuit.  Retreat.    Talb. Bring forth the Body of old Salisbury, And here aduance it in the Market-Place, The middle Centure of this cursed Towne. Now haue I pay'd my Vow vnto his Soule: For euery drop of blood was drawne from him, There hath at least fiue Frenchmen dyed to night. And that hereafter Ages may behold What ruine happened in reuenge of him, Within their chiefest Temple Ile erect A Tombe, wherein his Corps shall be interr'd: Vpon the which, that euery one may reade, Shall be engrau'd the sacke of Orleance, The trecherous manner of his mournefull death, And what a terror he had beene to France. But Lords, in all our bloudy Massacre, I muse we met not with the Dolphins Grace, His new-come Champion, vertuous Ioane of Acre, Nor any of his false Confederates     Bedf. 'Tis thought Lord Talbot, when the fight began, Rows'd on the sudden from their drowsie Beds, They did amongst the troupes of armed men, Leape o're the Walls for refuge in the field     Burg. My selfe, as farre as I could well discerne, For smoake, and duskie vapours of the night, Am sure I scar'd the Dolphin and his Trull, When Arme in Arme they both came swiftly running, Like to a payre of louing Turtle-Doues, That could not liue asunder day or night. After that things are set in order here, Wee'le follow them with all the power we haue. Enter a Messenger.    Mess. All hayle, my Lords: which of this Princely trayne Call ye the Warlike Talbot, for his Acts So much applauded through the Realme of France?   Talb. Here is the Talbot, who would speak with him?   Mess. The vertuous Lady, Countesse of Ouergne, With modestie admiring thy Renowne, By me entreats (great Lord) thou would'st vouchsafe To visit her poore Castle where she lyes, That she may boast she hath beheld the man, Whose glory fills the World with lowd report     Burg. Is it euen so? Nay, then I see our Warres Will turne vnto a peacefull Comick sport, When Ladyes craue to be encountred with. You may not (my Lord) despise her gentle suit     Talb. Ne're trust me then: for when a World of men Could not preuayle with all their Oratorie, Yet hath a Womans kindnesse ouer-rul'd: And therefore tell her, I returne great thankes, And in submission will attend on her. Will not your Honors beare me company?   Bedf. No, truly, 'tis more then manners will: And I haue heard it sayd, Vnbidden Guests Are often welcommest when they are gone     Talb. Well then, alone (since there's no remedie) I meane to proue this Ladyes courtesie. Come hither Captaine, you perceiue my minde.  Whispers.    Capt. I doe my Lord, and meane accordingly.  Exeunt.  Enter Countesse.    Count. Porter, remember what I gaue in charge, And when you haue done so, bring the Keyes to me     Port. Madame, I will. Enter.    Count. The Plot is layd, if all things fall out right, I shall as famous be by this exploit, As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus death. Great is the rumour of this dreadfull Knight, And his atchieuements of no lesse account: Faine would mine eyes be witnesse with mine eares, To giue their censure of these rare reports. Enter Messenger and Talbot.    Mess. Madame, according as your Ladyship desir'd, By Message crau'd, so is Lord Talbot come     Count. And he is welcome: what? is this the man?   Mess. Madame, it is     Count. Is this the Scourge of France? Is this the Talbot, so much fear'd abroad? That with his Name the Mothers still their Babes? I see Report is fabulous and false. I thought I should haue seene some Hercules, A second Hector, for his grim aspect, And large proportion of his strong knit Limbes. Alas, this is a Child, a silly Dwarfe: It cannot be, this weake and writhled shrimpe Should strike such terror to his Enemies     Talb. Madame, I haue beene bold to trouble you: But since your Ladyship is not at leysure, Ile sort some other time to visit you     Count. What meanes he now? Goe aske him, whither he goes?   Mess. Stay my Lord Talbot, for my Lady craues, To know the cause of your abrupt departure?   Talb. Marry, for that shee's in a wrong beleefe, I goe to certifie her Talbot's here. Enter Porter with Keyes.    Count. If thou be he, then art thou Prisoner     Talb. Prisoner? to whom?   Count. To me, blood-thirstie Lord: And for that cause I trayn'd thee to my House. Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me, For in my Gallery thy Picture hangs: But now the substance shall endure the like, And I will chayne these Legges and Armes of thine, That hast by Tyrannie these many yeeres Wasted our Countrey, slaine our Citizens, And sent our Sonnes and Husbands captiuate     Talb. Ha, ha, ha     Count. Laughest thou Wretch? Thy mirth shall turne to moane     Talb. I laugh to see your Ladyship so fond, To thinke, that you haue ought but Talbots shadow, Whereon to practise your seueritie     Count. Why? art not thou the man?   Talb. I am indeede     Count. Then haue I substance too     Talb. No, no, I am but shadow of my selfe: You are deceiu'd, my substance is not here; For what you see, is but the smallest part, And least proportion of Humanitie: I tell you Madame, were the whole Frame here, It is of such a spacious loftie pitch, Your Roofe were not sufficient to contayn't     Count. This is a Riddling Merchant for the nonce, He will be here, and yet he is not here: How can these contrarieties agree?   Talb. That will I shew you presently.  Winds his Horne, Drummes strike vp, a Peale of Ordenance: Enter Souldiors.  How say you Madame? are you now perswaded, That Talbot is but shadow of himselfe? These are his substance, sinewes, armes, and strength, With which he yoaketh your rebellious Neckes, Razeth your Cities, and subuerts your Townes, And in a moment makes them desolate     Count. Victorious Talbot, pardon my abuse, I finde thou art no lesse then Fame hath bruited, And more then may be gathered by thy shape. Let my presumption not prouoke thy wrath, For I am sorry, that with reuerence I did not entertaine thee as thou art     Talb. Be not dismay'd, faire Lady, nor misconster The minde of Talbot, as you did mistake The outward composition of his body. What you haue done, hath not offended me: Nor other satisfaction doe I craue, But onely with your patience, that we may Taste of your Wine, and see what Cates you haue, For Souldiers stomacks alwayes serue them well     Count. With all my heart, and thinke me honored, To feast so great a Warrior in my House.  Exeunt.  Enter Richard Plantagenet, Warwick, Somerset, Poole, and others.    Yorke. Great Lords and Gentlemen, What meanes this silence? Dare no man answer in a Case of Truth?   Suff. Within the Temple Hall we were too lowd, The Garden here is more conuenient     York. Then say at once, if I maintain'd the Truth: Or else was wrangling Somerset in th' error?   Suff. Faith I haue beene a Truant in the Law, And neuer yet could frame my will to it, And therefore frame the Law vnto my will     Som. Iudge you, my Lord of Warwicke, then betweene vs     War. Between two Hawks, which flyes the higher pitch, Between two Dogs, which hath the deeper mouth, Between two Blades, which beares the better temper, Between two Horses, which doth beare him best, Between two Girles, which hath the merryest eye, I haue perhaps some shallow spirit of Iudgement: But in these nice sharpe Quillets of the Law, Good faith I am no wiser then a Daw     York. Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance: The truth appeares so naked on my side, That any purblind eye may find it out     Som. And on my side it is so well apparrell'd, So cleare, so shining, and so euident, That it will glimmer through a blind-mans eye     York. Since you are tongue-ty'd, and so loth to speake, In dumbe significants proclayme your thoughts: Let him that is a true-borne Gentleman, And stands vpon the honor of his birth, If he suppose that I haue pleaded truth, From off this Bryer pluck a white Rose with me     Som. Let him that is no Coward, nor no Flatterer, But dare maintaine the partie of the truth, Pluck a red Rose from off this Thorne with me     War. I loue no Colours: and without all colour Of base insinuating flatterie, I pluck this white Rose with Plantagenet     Suff. I pluck this red Rose, with young Somerset, And say withall, I thinke he held the right     Vernon. Stay Lords and Gentlemen, and pluck no more Till you conclude, that he vpon whose side The fewest Roses are cropt from the Tree, Shall yeeld the other in the right opinion     Som. Good Master Vernon, it is well obiected: If I haue fewest, I subscribe in silence     York. And I     Vernon. Then for the truth, and plainnesse of the Case, I pluck this pale and Maiden Blossome here, Giuing my Verdict on the white Rose side     Som. Prick not your finger as you pluck it off, Least bleeding, you doe paint the white Rose red, And fall on my side so against your will     Vernon. If I, my Lord, for my opinion bleed, Opinion shall be Surgeon to my hurt, And keepe me on the side where still I am     Som. Well, well, come on, who else?   Lawyer. Vnlesse my Studie and my Bookes be false, The argument you held, was wrong in you; In signe whereof, I pluck a white Rose too     Yorke. Now Somerset, where is your argument?   Som. Here in my Scabbard, meditating, that Shall dye your white Rose in a bloody red     York. Meane time your cheeks do counterfeit our Roses: For pale they looke with feare, as witnessing The truth on our side     Som. No Plantagenet: Tis not for feare, but anger, that thy cheekes Blush for pure shame, to counterfeit our Roses, And yet thy tongue will not confesse thy error     Yorke. Hath not thy Rose a Canker, Somerset?   Som. Hath not thy Rose a Thorne, Plantagenet?   Yorke. I, sharpe and piercing to maintaine his truth, Whiles thy consuming Canker eates his falsehood     Som. Well, Ile find friends to weare my bleeding Roses, That shall maintaine what I haue said is true, Where false Plantagenet dare not be seene     Yorke. Now by this Maiden Blossome in my hand, I scorne thee and thy fashion, peeuish Boy     Suff. Turne not thy scornes this way, Plantagenet     Yorke. Prowd Poole, I will, and scorne both him and thee     Suff. Ile turne my part thereof into thy throat     Som. Away, away, good William de la Poole, We grace the Yeoman, by conuersing with him     Warw. Now by Gods will thou wrong'st him, Somerset: His Grandfather was Lyonel Duke of Clarence, Third Sonne to the third Edward King of England: Spring Crestlesse Yeomen from so deepe a Root?   Yorke. He beares him on the place's Priuiledge, Or durst not for his crauen heart say thus     Som. By him that made me, Ile maintaine my words On any Plot of Ground in Christendome. Was not thy Father, Richard, Earle of Cambridge, For Treason executed in our late Kings dayes? And by his Treason, stand'st not thou attainted, Corrupted, and exempt from ancient Gentry? His Trespas yet liues guiltie in thy blood, And till thou be restor'd, thou art a Yeoman     Yorke. My Father was attached, not attainted, Condemn'd to dye for Treason, but no Traytor; And that Ile proue on better men then Somerset, Were growing time once ripened to my will. For your partaker Poole, and you your selfe, Ile note you in my Booke of Memorie, To scourge you for this apprehension: Looke to it well, and say you are well warn'd     Som. Ah, thou shalt finde vs ready for thee still: And know vs by these Colours for thy Foes, For these, my friends in spight of thee shall weare     Yorke. And by my Soule, this pale and angry Rose, As Cognizance of my blood-drinking hate, Will I for euer, and my Faction weare, Vntill it wither with me to my Graue, Or flourish to the height of my Degree     Suff. Goe forward, and be choak'd with thy ambition: And so farwell, vntill I meet thee next. Enter.    Som. Haue with thee Poole: Farwell ambitious Richard. Enter.    Yorke. How I am brau'd, and must perforce endure it?   Warw. This blot that they obiect against your House, Shall be whipt out in the next Parliament, Call'd for the Truce of Winchester and Gloucester: And if thou be not then created Yorke, I will not liue to be accounted Warwicke. Meane time, in signall of my loue to thee, Against prowd Somerset, and William Poole, Will I vpon thy partie weare this Rose. And here I prophecie: this brawle to day, Growne to this faction in the Temple Garden, Shall send betweene the Red-Rose and the White, A thousand Soules to Death and deadly Night     Yorke. Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you, That you on my behalfe would pluck a Flower     Ver. In your behalfe still will I weare the same     Lawyer. And so will I     Yorke. Thankes gentle. Come, let vs foure to Dinner: I dare say, This Quarrell will drinke Blood another day.  Exeunt.  Enter Mortimer, brought in a Chayre, and Iaylors.    Mort. Kind Keepers of my weake decaying Age, Let dying Mortimer here rest himselfe. Euen like a man new haled from the Wrack, So fare my Limbes with long Imprisonment: And these gray Locks, the Pursuiuants of death, Nestor-like aged, in an Age of Care, Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer. These Eyes like Lampes, whose wasting Oyle is spent, Waxe dimme, as drawing to their Exigent. Weake Shoulders, ouer-borne with burthening Griefe, And pyth-lesse Armes, like to a withered Vine, That droupes his sappe-lesse Branches to the ground. Yet are these Feet, whose strength-lesse stay is numme, (Vnable to support this Lumpe of Clay) Swift-winged with desire to get a Graue, As witting I no other comfort haue. But tell me, Keeper, will my Nephew come?   Keeper. Richard Plantagenet, my Lord, will come: We sent vnto the Temple, vnto his Chamber, And answer was return'd, that he will come     Mort. Enough: my Soule shall then be satisfied. Poore Gentleman, his wrong doth equall mine. Since Henry Monmouth first began to reigne, Before whose Glory I was great in Armes, This loathsome sequestration haue I had; And euen since then, hath Richard beene obscur'd, Depriu'd of Honor and Inheritance. But now, the Arbitrator of Despaires, Iust Death, kinde Vmpire of mens miseries, With sweet enlargement doth dismisse me hence: I would his troubles likewise were expir'd, That so he might recouer what was lost. Enter Richard.    Keeper. My Lord, your louing Nephew now is come     Mor. Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?   Rich. I, Noble Vnckle, thus ignobly vs'd, Your Nephew, late despised Richard, comes     Mort. Direct mine Armes, I may embrace his Neck, And in his Bosome spend my latter gaspe. Oh tell me when my Lippes doe touch his Cheekes, That I may kindly giue one fainting Kisse. And now declare sweet Stem from Yorkes great Stock, Why didst thou say of late thou wert despis'd?   Rich. First, leane thine aged Back against mine Arme, And in that ease, Ile tell thee my Disease. This day in argument vpon a Case, Some words there grew 'twixt Somerset and me: Among which tearmes, he vs'd his lauish tongue, And did vpbrayd me with my Fathers death; Which obloquie set barres before my tongue, Else with the like I had requited him. Therefore good Vnckle, for my Fathers sake, In honor of a true Plantagenet, And for Alliance sake, declare the cause My Father, Earle of Cambridge, lost his Head     Mort. That cause (faire Nephew) that imprison'd me, And hath detayn'd me all my flowring Youth, Within a loathsome Dungeon, there to pyne, Was cursed Instrument of his decease     Rich. Discouer more at large what cause that was, For I am ignorant, and cannot guesse     Mort. I will, if that my fading breath permit, And Death approach not, ere my Tale be done. Henry the Fourth, Grandfather to this King, Depos'd his Nephew Richard, Edwards Sonne, The first begotten, and the lawfull Heire Of Edward King, the Third of that Descent. During whose Reigne, the Percies of the North, Finding his Vsurpation most vniust, Endeuour'd my aduancement to the Throne. The reason mou'd these Warlike Lords to this, Was, for that (young Richard thus re