[Illustration]     Ridgway of Montana   A story of to-day, in which the hero is also the villain  by William Macleod Raine     To JEAN AND THAT KINGDOM  “Where you and I through this world’s weather Work, and give praise and thanks together.”     CONTENTS   CHAPTER I. Two Men and a Woman  CHAPTER II. The Freebooter  CHAPTER III. One to One  CHAPTER IV. Fort Salvation  CHAPTER V. Enter Simon Harley  CHAPTER VI. On the Snow-trail  CHAPTER VII. Back from Arcadia  CHAPTER VIII. The Honorable Thomas B. Pelton  CHAPTER IX. An Evening Call  CHAPTER X. Harley Makes a Proposition  CHAPTER XI. Virginia Intervenes  CHAPTER XII. Aline Makes a Discovery  CHAPTER XIII. First Blood  CHAPTER XIV. A Conspiracy  CHAPTER XV. Laska Opens a Door  CHAPTER XVI. An Explosion in the Taurus  CHAPTER XVII. The Election  CHAPTER XVIII. Further Developments  CHAPTER XIX. One Million Dollars  CHAPTER XX. A Little Lunch at Alphonse’s  CHAPTER XXI. Harley Scores  CHAPTER XXII. “Not Guilty”—“Guilty”  CHAPTER XXIII. Aline Turns a Corner  CHAPTER XXIV. A Good Samaritan  CHAPTER XXV. Friendly Enemies  CHAPTER XXVI. Breaks One and Makes Another Engagement     CHAPTER I. TWO MEN AND A WOMAN   “Mr. Ridgway, ma’am.”  The young woman who was giving the last touches to the very effective picture framed in her long looking-glass nodded almost imperceptibly.  She had come to the parting of the ways, and she knew it, with a shrewd suspicion as to which she would choose. She had asked for a week to decide, and her heart-searching had told her nothing new. It was characteristic of Virginia Balfour that she did not attempt to deceive herself. If she married Waring Ridgway it would be for what she considered good and sufficient reasons, but love would not be one of them. He was going to be a great man, for one thing, and probably a very rich one, which counted, though it would not be a determining factor. This she could find only in the man himself, in the masterful force that made him what he was. The sandstings of life did not disturb his confidence in his victorious star, nor did he let fine-spun moral obligations hamper his predatory career. He had a genius for success in whatever he undertook, pushing his way to his end with a shrewd, direct energy that never faltered. She sometimes wondered whether she, too, like the men he used as tools, was merely a pawn in his game, and her consent an empty formality conceded to convention. Perhaps he would marry her even if she did not want to, she told herself, with the sudden illuminating smile that was one of her chief charms.  But Ridgway’s wary eyes, appraising her mood as she came forward to meet him, read none of this doubt in her frank greeting. Anything more sure and exquisite than the cultivation Virginia Balfour breathed he would have been hard put to it to conceive. That her gown and its accessories seemed to him merely the extension of a dainty personality was the highest compliment he could pay her charm, and an entirely unconscious one.  “Have I kept you waiting?” she smiled, giving him her hand.  His answering smile, quite cool and unperturbed, gave the lie to his words. “For a year, though the almanac called it a week.”  “You must have suffered,” she told him ironically, with a glance at the clear color in his good-looking face.  “Repressed emotion,” he explained. “May I hope that my suffering has reached a period?”  They had been sauntering toward a little conservatory at the end of the large room, but she deflected and brought up at a table on which lay some books. One of these she picked up and looked at incuriously for a moment before sweeping them aside. She rested her hands on the table behind her and leaned back against it, her eyes meeting his fairly.  “You’re still of the same mind, are you?” she demanded.  “Oh! very much.”  She lifted herself to the table, crossing her feet and dangling them irresponsibly. “We might as well be comfy while we talk;” and she indicated, by a nod, a chair.  “Thanks. If you don’t mind, I think I’ll take it standing.”  She did not seem in any hurry to begin, and Ridgway gave evidence of no desire to hasten her. But presently he said, with a little laugh that seemed to offer her inclusion in the joke:  “I’m on the anxious seat, you know—waiting to find out whether I’m to be the happiest man alive.”  “You know as much about it as I do.” She echoed his laugh ruefully. “I’m still as much at sea as I was last week. I couldn’t tell then, and I can’t now.”  “No news is good news, they say.”  “I don’t want to marry you a bit, but you’re a great catch, as you are very well aware.”  “I suppose I am rather a catch,” he agreed, the shadow of a smile at the corners of his mouth.  “It isn’t only your money; though, of course, that’s a temptation,” she admitted audaciously.  “I’m glad it’s not only my money.” He could laugh with her about it because he was shrewd enough to understand that it was not at all his wealth. Her cool frankness might have frightened away another man. It merely served to interest Ridgway. For, with all his strength, he was a vain man, always ready to talk of himself. He spent a good deal of his spare time interpreting himself to attractive and attracted young women.  Her gaze fastened on the tip of her suede toe, apparently studying it attentively. “It would be a gratification to my vanity to parade you as the captive of my bow and spear. You’re such a magnificent specimen, such a berserk in broadcloth. Still. I shan’t marry you if I can help it—but, then, I’m not sure that I can help it. Of course, I disapprove of you entirely, but you’re rather fascinating, you know.” Her eye traveled slowly up to his, appraising the masterful lines of his square figure, the dominant strength of his close-shut mouth and resolute eyes. “Perhaps ‘fascinating’ isn’t just the word, but I can’t help being interested in you, whether I like you or not. I suppose you always get what you want very badly?” she flung out by way of question.  “That’s what I’m trying to discover”—he smiled.  “There are things to be considered both ways,” she said, taking him into her confidence. “You trample on others. How do I know you wouldn’t tread on me?”  “That would be one of the risks you would take,” he agreed impersonally.  “I shouldn’t like that at all. If I married you it would be because as your wife I should have so many opportunities. I should expect to do exactly as I please. I shouldn’t want you to interfere with me, though I should want to be able to influence you.”  “Nothing could be fairer than that,” was his amiably ironical comment.  “You see, I don’t know you—not really—and they say all sorts of things about you.”  “They don’t say I am a quitter, do they?”  She leaned forward, chin in hand and elbow on knee. It was a part of the accent of her distinction that as a rebel she was both demure and daring. “I wonder if I might ask you some questions—the intimate kind that people think but don’t say—at least, they don’t say them to you.”  “It would be a pleasure to me to be put on the witness-stand. I should probably pick up some interesting side-lights about myself.”  “Very well.” Her eyes danced with excitement. “You’re what they call a buccaneer of business, aren’t you?”  Here were certainly diverting pastimes. “I believe I have been called that; but, then, I’ve had the hardest names in the dictionary thrown at me so often that I can’t be sure.”  “I suppose you are perfectly unscrupulous in a business way—stop at nothing to gain your point?”  He took her impudence smilingly.  “‘Unscrupulous’ isn’t the word I use when I explain myself to myself, but as an unflattered description, such as one my enemies might use to describe me, I dare say it is fairly accurate.”  “I wonder why. Do you dispense with a conscience entirely?”  “Well, you see, Miss Balfour, if I nursed a New England conscience I could stand up to the attacks of the Consolidated about as long as a dove to a hawk. I meet fire with fire to avoid being wiped off the map of the mining world. I play the game. I can’t afford to keep a button on my foil when my opponent doesn’t.”  She nodded an admission of his point. “And yet there are rules of the game to be observed, aren’t there? The Consolidated people claim you steal their ore, I believe.” Her slanted eyes studied the effect of her daring.  He laughed grimly. “Do they? I claim they steal mine. It’s rather difficult to have an exact regard for mine and thine before the courts decide which is which.”  “And meanwhile, in order to forestall an adverse decision, you are working extra shifts to get all the ore out of the disputed veins.”  “Precisely, just as they are,” he admitted dryly. “Then the side that loses will not be so disappointed, since the value of the veins will be less. Besides, stealing ore openly doesn’t count. It is really a moral obligation in a fight like this,” he explained.  “A moral obligation?”  “Exactly. You can’t hit a trust over the head with the decalogue. Modern business is war. Somebody is bound to get hurt. If I win out it will be because I put up a better fight than the Consolidated, and cripple it enough to make it let me alone. I’m looking out for myself, and I don’t pretend to be any better than my neighbors. When you get down to bed-rock honesty, I’ve never seen it in business. We’re all of us as honest as we think we can afford to be. I haven’t noticed that there is any premium on it in Mesa. Might makes right. I’ll win if I’m strong enough; I’ll fail if I’m not. That’s the law of life. I didn’t make this strenuous little world, and I’m not responsible for it. If I play I have to take the rules the way they are, not the way I should like them to be. I’m not squeamish, and I’m not a hypocrite. Simon Harley isn’t squeamish, either, but he happens to be a hypocrite. So there you have the difference between us.”  The president of the Mesa Ore-producing Company set forth his creed jauntily, without the least consciousness of need for apology for the fact that it happened to be divorced from morality. Its frank disregard of ethical considerations startled Miss Balfour without shocking her. She liked his candor, even though it condemned him. It was really very nice of him to take her impudence so well. He certainly wasn’t a prig, anyway.  “And morality,” she suggested tentatively.  “—hasn’t a thing to do with success, the parsons to the contrary notwithstanding. The battle is to the strong.”  “Then the Consolidated will beat you finally.”  He smiled. “They would if I’d let them; but brains and resource and finesse all count for power. Granted that they have a hundred dollars to my one. Still, I have elements of strength they can’t even estimate. David beat Goliath, you know, even though he didn’t do it with a big stick.”  “So you think morality is for old women?”  “And young women,” he amended, smiling.  “And every man is to be a law unto himself?”  “Not quite. Some men aren’t big enough to be. Let them stick to the conventional code. For me, if I make my own laws I don’t break them.”  “And you’re sure that you’re on the road to true success?” she asked lightly.  “Now, you have heaven in the back of your mind.”  “Not exactly,” she laughed. “But I didn’t expect you to understand.”  “Then I won’t disappoint you,” he said cheerfully.  She came back to the concrete.  “I should like to know whether it is true that you own the courts of Yuba County and have the decisions of the judges written at your lawyer’s offices in cases between you and the Consolidated.”  “If I do,” he answered easily, “I am doing just what the Consolidated would do in case they had been so fortunate as to have won the last election and seated their judicial candidates. One expects a friendly leaning from the men one put in office.”  “Isn’t the judiciary supposed to be the final, incorruptible bulwark of the nation?” she pretended to want to know.  “I believe it is supposed to be.”  “Isn’t it rather—loading the dice, to interfere with the courts?”  “I find the dice already loaded. I merely substitute others of my own.”  “You don’t seem a bit ashamed of yourself.”  “I’m ashamed of the Consolidated”—he smiled.  “That’s a comfortable position to be able to take.” She fixed him for a moment with her charming frown of interrogation. “You won’t mind my asking these questions? I’m trying to decide whether you are too much of a pirate for me. Perhaps when I’ve made up my mind you won’t want me,” she added.  “Oh, I’ll want you!” Then coolly: “Shall we wait till you make up your mind before announcing the engagement?”  “Don’t be too sure,” she flashed at him.  “I’m horribly unsure.”  “Of course, you’re laughing at me, just as you would”—she tilted a sudden sideways glance at him—“if I asked you WHY you wanted to marry me.”  “Oh, if you take me that way——”  She interrupted airily. “I’m trying to make up my mind whether to take you at all.”  “You certainly have a direct way of getting at things.”  He studied appreciatively her piquant, tilted face; the long, graceful lines of her slender, perfect figure. “I take it you don’t want the sentimental reason for my wishing to marry you, though I find that amply justified. But if you want another, you must still look to yourself for it. My business leads me to appreciate values correctly. When I desire you to sit at the head of my table, to order my house, my judgment justifies itself. I have a fancy always for the best. When I can’t gratify it I do without.”  “Thank you.” She made him a gay little mock curtsy “I had heard you were no carpet-knight, Mr. Ridgway. But rumor is a lying jade, for I am being told—am I not?—that in case I don’t take pity on you, the lone future of a celibate stretches drear before you.”  “Oh, certainly.”  Having come to the end of that passage, she tried another. “A young man told me yesterday you were a fighter. He said he guessed you would stand the acid. What did he mean?”  Ridgway was an egoist from head to heel. He could voice his own praises by the hour when necessary, but now he side-stepped her little trap to make him praise himself at second-hand.  “Better ask him.”  “ARE you a fighter, then?”  Had he known her and her whimsies less well, he might have taken her audacity for innocence.  “One couldn’t lie down, you know.”  “Of course, you always fight fair,” she mocked.  “When a fellow’s attacked by a gang of thugs he doesn’t pray for boxing-gloves. He lets fly with a coupling-pin if that’s what comes handy.”  Her eyes, glinting sparks of mischief, marveled at him with mock reverence, but she knew in her heart that her mockery was a fraud. She did admire him; admired him even while she disapproved the magnificent lawlessness of him.  For Waring Ridgway looked every inch the indomitable fighter he was. He stood six feet to the line, straight and strong, carrying just sufficient bulk to temper his restless energy without impairing its power. Nor did the face offer any shock of disappointment to the promise given by the splendid figure. Salient-jawed and forceful, set with cool, flinty, blue-gray eyes, no place for weakness could be found there. One might have read a moral callousness, a colorblindness in points of rectitude, but when the last word had been said, its masterful capability, remained the outstanding impression.  “Am I out of the witness-box?” he presently asked, still leaning against the mantel from which he had been watching her impersonally as an intellectual entertainment.  “I think so.”  “And the verdict?”  “You know what it ought to be,” she accused.  “Fortunately, kisses go by favor, not by, merit.”  “You don’t even make a pretense of deserving.”  “Give me credit for being an honest rogue, at least.”  “But a rogue?” she insisted lightly.  “Oh, a question of definitions. I could make a very good case for myself as an honest man.”  “If you thought it worth while?”  “If I didn’t happen to want to be square with you”—he smiled.  “You’re so fond of me, I suppose, that you couldn’t bear to have me think too well of you.”  “You know how fond of you I am.”  “Yes, it is a pity about you,” she scoffed.  “Believe me, yes,” he replied cheerfully.  She drummed with her pink finger-tips on her chin, studying him meditatively. To do him justice, she had to admit that he did not even pretend much. He wanted her because she was a step up in the social ladder, and, in his opinion, the most attractive girl he knew. That he was not in love with her relieved the situation, as Miss Balfour admitted to herself in impersonal moods. But there were times when she could have wished he were. She felt it to be really due her attractions that his pulses should quicken for her, and in the interests of experience she would have liked to see how he would make love if he really meant it from the heart and not the will.  “It’s really an awful bother,” she sighed.  “Referring to the little problem of your future?”  “Yes.”  “Can’t make up your mind whether I come in?”  “No.” She looked up brightly, with an effect of impulsiveness. “I don’t suppose you want to give me another week?”  “A reprieve! But why? You’re going to marry me.”  “I suppose so.” She laughed. “I wish I could have my cake, and eat it, too.”  “It would be a moral iniquity to encourage such a system of ethics.”  “So you won’t give me a week?” she sighed. “All sorts of things might have happened in that week. I shall always believe that the fairy prince would have come for me.”  “Believe that he HAS come,” he claimed.  “Oh, I didn’t mean a prince of pirates, though there is a triumph in having tamed a pirate chief to prosaic matrimony. In one way it will be a pity, too. You won’t be half so picturesque. You remember how Stevenson puts it: ‘that marriage takes from a man the capacity for great things, whether good or bad.’”  “I can stand a good deal of taming.”  “Domesticating a pirate ought to be an interesting process,” she conceded, her rare smile flashing. “It should prove a cure for ENNUI, but then I’m never a victim of that malady.”  “Am I being told that I am to be the happiest pirate alive?”  “I expect you are.”  His big hand gripped hers till it tingled. She caught his eye on a roving quest to the door.  “We don’t have to do that,” she announced hurriedly, with an embarrassed flush.  “I don’t do it because I have to,” he retorted, kissing her on the lips.  She fell back, protesting. “Under the circumstances—”  The butler, with a card on a tray, interrupted silently. She glanced at the card, devoutly grateful his impassive majesty’s entrance had not been a moment earlier.  “Show him in here.”  “The fairy prince, five minutes too late?” asked Ridgway, when the man had gone.  For answer she handed him the card, yet he thought the pink that flushed her cheek was something more pronounced than usual. But he was willing to admit there might be a choice of reasons for that.  “Lyndon Hobart” was the name he read.  “I think the Consolidated is going to have its innings. I should like to stay, of course, but I fear I must plead a subsequent engagement and leave the field to the enemy.”  Pronouncing “Mr. Hobart” without emphasis, the butler vanished. The newcomer came forward with the quiet assurance of the born aristocrat. He was a slender, well-knit man, dressed fastidiously, with clear-cut, classical features; cool, keen eyes, and a gentle, you-be-damned manner to his inferiors. Beside him Ridgway bulked too large, too florid. His ease seemed a little obvious, his prosperity overemphasized. Even his voice, strong and reliant, lacked the tone of gentle blood that Hobart had inherited with his nice taste.  When Miss Balfour said: “I think you know each other,” the manager of the Consolidated bowed with stiff formality, but his rival laughed genially and said: “Oh, yes, I know Mr. Hobart.” The geniality was genuine enough, but through it ran a note of contempt. Hobart read in it a veiled taunt. To him it seemed to say:  “Yes, I have met him, and beaten him at every turn of the road, though he has been backed by a power with resources a hundred times as great as mine.”  In his parting excuses to Miss Balfour, Ridgway’s audacity crystallized in words that Hobart could only regard as a shameless challenge. “I regret that an appointment with Judge Purcell necessitates my leaving such good company,” he said urbanely.  Purcell was the judge before whom was pending a suit between the Consolidated and the Mesa Ore-producing Company, to determine the ownership of the Never Say Die Mine; and it was current report that Ridgway owned him as absolutely as he did the automobile waiting for him now at the door.  If Ridgway expected his opponent to pay his flippant gibe the honor of repartee, he was disappointed. To be sure, Hobart, admirably erect in his slender grace, was moved to a slight, disdainful smile, but it evidenced scarcely the appreciation that anybody less impervious to criticism than Ridgway would have cared to see.     CHAPTER II. THE FREEBOOTER   When next Virginia Balfour saw Waring Ridgway she was driving her trap down one of the hit-or-miss streets of Mesa, where derricks, shaft-houses, and gray slag-dumps shoulder ornate mansions conglomerate of many unharmonious details of architecture. To Miss Balfour these composites and their owners would have been joys unalloyed except for the microbe of society ambition that was infecting the latter, and transforming them from simple, robust, self-reliant Westerners into a class of servile, nondescript newly rich, that resembled their unfettered selves as much as tame bears do the grizzlies of their own Rockies. As she had once complained smilingly to Hobart, she had not come to the West to study ragged edges of the social fringe. She might have done that in New York.  Virginia was still a block or two from the court-house on the hill, when it emptied into the street a concourse of excited men. That this was an occasion of some sort it was easy to guess, and of what sort she began to have an inkling, when Ridgway came out, the center of a circle of congratulating admirers. She was obliged to admit that he accepted their applause without in the least losing his head. Indeed, he took it as imperturbably as did Hobart, against whom a wave of the enthusiasm seemed to be directed in the form of a jeer, when he passed down the steps with Mott, one of the Consolidated lawyers. Miss Balfour timed her approach to meet Hobart at a right angle.  “What is it all about?” she asked, after he had reached her side.  “Judge Purcell has just decided the Never Say Die case in favor of Mr. Ridgway and against the Consolidated.”  “Is that a great victory for him?”  “Yes, it’s a victory, though, of course, we appeal,” admitted Hobart. “But we can’t say we didn’t expect it,” he added cheerfully.  “Mayn’t I give you a lift if you are going down-town?” she said quickly, for Ridgway, having detached himself from the group, was working toward her, and she felt an instinctive sympathy for the man who had lost. Furthermore, she had something she wanted to tell him before he heard it on the tongue of rumor.  “Since you are so kind;” and he climbed to the place beside her.  “Congratulate me, Miss Balfour,” demanded Ridgway, as he shook hands with her, nodding coolly at her companion. “I’m a million dollars richer than I was an hour ago. I have met the enemy and he is mine.”  Virginia, resenting the bad taste of his jeer at the man who sat beside her, misunderstood him promptly. “Did you say you had met the enemy and won his mine?”  He laughed. “You’re a good one!”  “Thank you very much for this unsolicited testimonial,” she said gravely. “In the meantime, to avoid a congestion of traffic, we’ll be moving, if you will kindly give me back my front left wheel.”  He did not lift his foot from the spoke on which it rested. “My congratulations,” he reminded her.  “I wish you all the joy in your victory that you deserve, and I hope the supreme court will reaffirm the decision of Judge Purcell, if it is a just one,” was the form in which she acceded to his demand.  She flicked her whip, and Ridgway fell back, laughing. “You’ve been subsidized by the Consolidated,” he shouted after her.  Hobart watched silently the businesslike directness with which the girl handled the ribbons. She looked every inch the thoroughbred in her well-made covert coat and dainty driving gauntlets. The grace of the alert, slender figure, the perfect poise of the beautiful little tawny head, proclaimed her distinction no less certainly than the fine modeling of the mobile face. It was a distinction that stirred the pulse of his emotion and disarmed his keen, critical sense. Ridgway could study her with an amused, detached interest, but Hobart’s admiration had traveled past that point. He found it as impossible to define her charm as to evade it. Her inheritance of blood and her environment should have made her a finished product of civilization, but her salty breeziness, her nerve, vivid as a flame at times, disturbed delightfully the poise that held her when in repose.  When Virginia spoke, it was to ask abruptly: “Is it really his mine?”  “Judge Purcell says so.”  “But do YOU think so—down in the bottom of your heart?”  “Wouldn’t I naturally be prejudiced?”  “I suppose you would. Everybody in Mesa seems to have taken sides either with Mr. Ridgway or the Consolidated. Still, you have an option. Is he what his friends proclaim him—the generous-hearted independent fighting against trust domination? Or is he merely an audacious ore-thief, as his enemies say? The truth must be somewhere.”  “It seems to lie mostly in point of view here the angle of observation being determined by interest,” he answered.  “And from your angle of observation?”  “He is the most unusual man I ever saw, the most resourceful and the most competent. He never knows when he is beaten. I suppose that’s the reason he never is beaten finally. We have driven him to the wall a score of times. My experience with him is that he’s most dangerous when one thinks he must be about hammered out. He always hits back then in the most daring and unexpected way.”  “With a coupling-pin,” she suggested with a little reminiscent laugh.  “Metaphorically speaking. He reaches for the first effective weapon to his hand.”  “You haven’t quite answered my question yet,” she reminded him. “Is he what his friends or what his enemies think him?”  “If you ask me I can only say that I’m one of his enemies.”  “But a fair-minded man,” she replied quickly.  “Thank you. Then I’ll say that perhaps he is neither just what his friends or his foes think him. One must make allowances for his training and temperament, and for that quality of bigness in him. ‘Mediocre men go soberly on the highroads, but saints and scoundrels meet in the jails,’” he smilingly quoted.  “He would make a queer sort of saint,” she laughed.  “A typical twentieth century one of a money-mad age.”  She liked it in him that he would not use the opportunity she had made to sneer at his adversary, none the less because she knew that Ridgway might not have been so scrupulous in his place. That Lyndon Hobart’s fastidious instincts for fair play had stood in the way of his success in the fight to down Ridgway she had repeatedly heard. Of late, rumors had persisted in reporting dissatisfaction with his management of the Consolidated at the great financial center on Broadway which controlled the big copper company. Simon Harley, the dominating factor in the octopus whose tentacles reached out in every direction to monopolize the avenues of wealth, demanded of his subordinates results. Methods were no concern of his, and failure could not be explained to him. He wanted Ridgway crushed, and the pulse of the copper production regulated lay the Consolidated. Instead, he had seen Ridgway rise steadily to power and wealth despite his efforts to wipe him off the slate. Hobart was perfectly aware that his head was likely to fall when Harley heard of Purcell’s decision in regard to the Never Say Die.  “He certainly is an amazing man,” Virginia mused, her fiancee in mind. “It would be interesting to discover what he can’t do—along utilitarian lines, I mean. Is he as good a miner underground as he is in the courts?” she flung out.  “He is the shrewdest investor I know. Time and again he has leased or bought apparently worthless claims, and made them pay inside of a few weeks. Take the Taurus as a case in point. He struck rich ore in a fortnight. Other men had done development work for years and found nothing.”  “I’m naturally interested in knowing all about him, because I have just become engaged to him,” explained Miss Virginia, as calmly as if her pulse were not fluttering a hundred to the minute.  Virginia was essentially a sportsman. She did not flinch from the guns when the firing was heavy. It had been remarked of her even as a child that she liked to get unpleasant things over with as soon as possible, rather than postpone them. Once, _aetat_ eight, she had marched in to her mother like a stoic and announced: “I’ve come to be whipped, momsie, ’cause I broke that horrid little Nellie Vaile’s doll. I did it on purpose, ’cause I was mad at her. I’m glad I broke it, so there!”  Hobart paled slightly beneath his outdoors Western tan, but his eyes met hers very steadily and fairly. “I wish you happiness, Miss Balfour, from the bottom of my heart.”  She nodded a brisk “Thank you,” and directed her attention again to the horses.  “Take him by and large, Mr. Ridgway is the most capable, energetic, and far-sighted business man I have ever known. He has a bigger grasp of things than almost any financier in the country. I think you’ll find he will go far,” he said, choosing his words with care to say as much for Waring Ridgway as he honestly could.  “I have always thought so,” agreed Virginia.  She had reason for thinking so in that young man’s remarkable career. When Waring Ridgway had first come to Mesa he had been a draftsman for the Consolidated at five dollars a day. He was just out of Cornell, and his assets consisted mainly of a supreme confidence in himself and an imposing presence. He was a born leader, and he flung himself into the raw, turbid life of the mining town with a readiness that had not a little to do with his subsequent success.  That success began to take tangible form almost from the first. A small, independent smelter that had for long been working at a loss was about to fall into the hands of the Consolidated when Ridgway bought it on promises to pay, made good by raising money on a flying trip he took to the East. His father died about this time and left him fifty thousand dollars, with which he bought the Taurus, a mine in which several adventurous spirits had dropped small fortunes. He acquired other properties; a lease here, an interest there. It began to be observed that he bought always with judgment. He seemed to have the touch of Midas. Where other men had lost money he made it.  When the officers of the Consolidated woke up to the menace of his presence, one of their lawyers called on him. The agent of the Consolidated smiled at his luxurious offices, which looked more like a woman’s boudoir than the business place of a Western miner. But that was merely part of Ridgway’s vanity, and did not in the least interfere with his predatory instincts. Many people who walked into that parlor to do business played fly to his spider.  The lawyer had been ready to patronize the upstart who had ventured so boldly into the territory of the great trust, but one glance at the clear-cut resolute face of the young man changed his mind.  “I’ve come to make you an offer for your smelter, Mr. Ridgway,” he began. “We’ll take it off your hands at the price it cost you.”  “Not for sale, Mr. Bartel.”  “Very well. We’ll give you ten thousand more than you paid for it.”  “You misunderstand me. It is not for sale.”  “Oh, come! You bought it to sell to us. What can you do with it?”  “Run it,” suggested Ridgway.  “Without ore?”  “You forget that I own a few properties, and have leases on others. When the Taurus begins producing, I’ll have enough to keep the smelter going.”  “When the Taurus begins producing?”—Bartel smiled skeptically. “Didn’t Johnson and Leroy drop fortunes on that expectation?”  “I’ll bet five thousand dollars we make a strike within two weeks.”  “Chimerical!” pronounced the graybeard as he rose to go, with an air of finality. “Better sell the smelter while you have the chance.”  “Think not,” disagreed Ridgway.  At the door the lawyer turned. “Oh, there’s another matter! It had slipped my mind.” He spoke with rather elaborate carelessness. “It seems that there is a little triangle—about ten and four feet across—wedged in between the Mary K, the Diamond King, and the Marcus Daly. For some reason we accidentally omitted to file on it. Our chief engineer finds that you have taken it up, Mr. Ridgway. It is really of no value, but it is in the heart of our properties, and so it ought to belong to us. Of course, it is of no use to you. There isn’t any possible room to sink a shaft. We’ll take it from you if you like, and even pay you a nominal price. For what will you sell?”  Ridgway lit a cigar before he answered: “One million dollars.”  “What?” screamed Bartel.  “Not a cent less. I call it the Trust Buster. Before I’m through, you’ll find it is worth that to me.”  The lawyer reported him demented to the Consolidated officials, who declared war on him from that day.  They found the young adventurer more than prepared for them. If he had a Napoleonic sense of big vital factors, he had no less a genius for detail. He had already picked up an intimate knowledge of the hundreds of veins and crossveins that traverse the Mesa copper-fields, and he had delved patiently into the tangled history of the litigation that the defective mining laws in pioneer days had made possible. When the Consolidated attempted to harass him by legal process, he countered by instituting a score of suits against the company within the week. These had to do with wills, insanity cases, extra lateral rights, mine titles, and land and water rights. Wherever Ridgway saw room for an entering wedge to dispute the title of the Consolidated, he drove a new suit home. To say the least, the trust found it annoying to be enjoined from working its mines, to be cited for contempt before judges employed in the interests of its opponent, to be served with restraining orders when clearly within its rights. But when these adverse legal decisions began to affect vital issues, the Consolidated looked for reasons why Ridgway should control the courts. It found them in politics.  For Ridgway was already dominating the politics of Yuba County, displaying an amazing acumen and a surprising ability as a stumpspeaker. He posed as a friend of the people, an enemy of the trust. He declared an eight-hour day for his own miners, and called upon the Consolidated to do the same. Hobart refused, acting on orders from Broadway, and fifteen thousand Consolidated miners went to the polls and reelected Ridgway’s corrupt judges, in spite of the fight the Consolidated was making against them.  Meanwhile, Ridgway’s colossal audacity made the Consolidated’s copper pay for the litigation with which he was harassing it. In following his ore-veins, or what he claimed to be his veins, he crossed boldly into the territory of the enemy. By the law of extra lateral rights, a man is entitled to mine within the lines of other property than his own, provided he is following the dip of a vein which has its apex in his claim. Ridgway’s experts were prepared to swear that all the best veins in the field apexed in his property. Pending decisions of the courts, they assumed it, tunneling through granite till they tapped the veins of the Consolidated mines, meanwhile enjoining that company from working the very ore of which Ridgway was robbing it.  Many times the great trust back of the Consolidated had him close to ruin, but Ridgway’s alert brain and supreme audacity carried him through. From their mines or from his own he always succeeded in extracting enough ore to meet his obligations when they fell due. His powerful enemy, as Hobart had told Miss Balfour, found him most dangerous when it seemed to have him with his back to the wall. Then unexpectedly would fall some crushing blow that put the financial kings of Broadway on the defensive long enough for him to slip out of the corner into which they had driven him. Greatly daring, he had the successful cavalryman’s instinct of risking much to gain much. A gambler, his enemies characterized him fitly enough. But it was also true, as Mesa phrased it, that he gambled “with the lid off,” playing for large stakes, neither asking nor giving quarter.  At the end of five years of desperate fighting, the freebooter was more strongly entrenched than he had been at any previous time. The railroads, pledged to give rebates to the Consolidated, had been forced by Ridgway, under menace of adverse legislation from the men he controlled at the State-house, to give him secretly a still better rate than the trust. He owned the county courts, he was supported by the people, and had become a political dictator, and the financial outlook for him grew brighter every day.  Such were the conditions when Judge Purcell handed down his Never Say Die decision. Within an hour Hobart was reading a telegram in cipher from the Broadway headquarters. It announced the immediate departure for Mesa of the great leader of the octopus. Simon Harley, the Napoleon of finance, was coming out to attend personally to the destruction of the buccaneer who had dared to fire on the trust flag.  Before night some one of his corps of spies in the employ of the enemy carried the news to Waring Ridgway. He smiled grimly, his bluegray eyes hardening to the temper of steel. Here at last was a foeman worthy of his metal; one as lawless, unscrupulous, daring, and far-seeing as himself, with a hundred times his resources.     CHAPTER III. ONE TO ONE   The solitary rider stood for a moment in silhouette against the somber sky-line, his keen eyes searching the lowering clouds.  “Getting its back up for a blizzard,” he muttered to himself, as he touched his pony with the spur.  Dark, heavy billows banked in the west, piling over each other as they drove forward. Already the advance-guard had swept the sunlight from the earth, except for a flutter of it that still protested near the horizon. Scattering snowflakes were flying, and even in a few minutes the temperature had fallen many degrees.  The rider knew the signs of old. He recognized the sudden stealthy approach that transformed a sun-drenched, friendly plain into an unknown arctic waste. Not for nothing had he been last year one of a search-party to find the bodies of three miners frozen to death not fifty yards from their own cabin. He understood perfectly what it meant to be caught away from shelter when the driven white pall wiped out distance and direction; made long familiar landmarks strange, and numbed the will to a helpless surrender. The knowledge of it was spur enough to make him ride fast while he still retained the sense of direction.  But silently, steadily, the storm increased, and he was forced to slacken his pace. As the blinding snow grew thick, the sound of the wind deadened, unable to penetrate the dense white wall through which he forced his way. The world narrowed to a space whose boundaries he could touch with his extended hands. In this white mystery that wrapped him, nothing was left but stinging snow, bitter cold, and the silence of the dead.  So he thought one moment, and the next was almost flung by his swerving horse into a vehicle that blocked the road. Its blurred outlines presently resolved themselves into an automobile, crouched in the bottom of which was an inert huddle of humanity.  He shouted, forgetting that no voice could carry through the muffled scream of the storm. When he got no answer, he guided his horse close to the machine and reached down to snatch away the rug already heavy with snow. To his surprise, it was a girl’s despairing face that looked up at him. She tried to rise, but fell back, her muscles too numb to serve.  “Don’t leave me,” she implored, stretching her, arms toward him.  He reached out and lifted her to his horse. “Are you alone?”  “Yes. He went for help when the machine broke down—before the storm,” she sobbed. He had to put his ear to her mouth to catch the words.  “Come, keep up your heart.” There was that in his voice pealed like a trumpet-call to her courage.  “I’m freezing to death,” she moaned.  She was exhausted and benumbed, her lips blue, her flesh gray. It was plain to him that she had reached the limit of endurance, that she was ready to sink into the last torpor. He ripped open his overcoat and shook the snow from it, then gathered her close so that she might get the warmth of his body. The rugs from the automobile he wrapped round them both.  “Courage!” he cried. “There’s a miner’s cabin near. Don’t give up, child.”  But his own courage was of the heart and will, not of the head. He had small hope of reaching the hut at the entrance of Dead Man’s Gulch or, if he could struggle so far, of finding it in the white swirl that clutched at them. Near and far are words not coined for a blizzard. He might stagger past with safety only a dozen feet from him. He might lie down and die at the very threshold of the door. Or he might wander in an opposite direction and miss the cabin by a mile.  Yet it was not in the man to give up. He must stagger on till he could no longer stand. He must fight so long as life was in him. He must crawl forward, though his forlorn hope had vanished. And he did. When the worn-out horse slipped down and could not be coaxed to its feet again, he picked up the bundle of rugs and plowed forward blindly, soul and body racked, but teeth still set fast with the primal instinct never to give up. The intense cold of the air, thick with gray sifted ice, searched the warmth from his body and sapped his vitality. His numbed legs doubled under him like springs. He was down and up again a dozen times, but always the call of life drove him on, dragging his helpless burden with him.  That he did find the safety of the cabin in the end was due to no wisdom on his part. He had followed unconsciously the dip of the ground that led him into the little draw where it had been built, and by sheer luck stumbled against it. His strength was gone, but the door gave to his weight, and he buckled across the threshold like a man helpless with drink. He dropped to the floor, ready to sink into a stupor, but he shook sleep from him and dragged himself to his feet. Presently his numb fingers found a match, a newspaper, and some wood. As soon as he had control over his hands, he fell to chafing hers. He slipped off her dainty shoes, pathetically inadequate for such an experience, and rubbed her feet back to feeling. She had been torpid, but when the blood began to circulate, she cried out in agony at the pain.  Every inch of her bore the hall-mark of wealth. The ermine-lined motoring-cloak, the broadcloth cut on simple lines of elegance, the quality of her lingerie and of the hosiery which incased the wonderfully small feet, all told of a padded existence from which the cares of life had been excluded. The satin flesh he massaged, to renew the flow of the dammed blood, was soft and tender like a babe’s. Quite surely she was an exotic, the last woman in the world fitted for the hardships of this frontier country. She had none of the deep-breasted vitality of those of her sex who have fought with grim nature and won. His experience told him that a very little longer in the storm would have snuffed out the wick of her life.  But he knew, too, that the danger was past. Faint tints of pink were beginning to warm the cheeks that had been so deathly pallid. Already crimson lips were offering a vivid contrast to the still, almost colorless face.  For she was biting the little lips to try and keep back the cries of pain that returning life wrung from her. Big tears coursed down her cheeks, and broken sobs caught her breath. She was helpless as an infant before the searching pain that wracked her.  “I can’t stand it—I can’t stand it,” she moaned, and in her distress stretched out her little hand for relief as a baby might to its mother.  The childlike appeal of the flinching violet eyes in the tortured face moved him strangely. He was accounted a hard man, not without reason. His eyes were those of a gambler, cold and vigilant. It was said that he could follow an undeviating course without relenting at the ruin and misery wrought upon others by his operations. But the helpless loveliness of this exquisitely dainty child-woman, the sense of intimacy bred of a common peril endured, of the strangeness of their environment and of her utter dependence upon him, carried the man out of himself and away from conventions.  He stooped and gathered her into his arms, walking the floor with her and cheering her as if she had indeed been the child they both for the moment conceived her.  “You don’t know how it hurts,” she pleaded between sobs, looking up into the strong face so close to hers.  “I know it must, dear. But soon it will be better. Every twinge is one less, and shows that you are getting well. Be brave for just a few minutes more now.”  She smiled wanly through her tears. “But I’m not brave. I’m a little coward—and it does pain so.”  “I know—I know. It is dreadful. But just a few minutes now.”  “You’re good to me,” she said presently, simply as a little girl might have said it.  To neither of them did it seem strange that she should be there in his arms, her fair head against his shoulder, nor that she should cling convulsively to him when the fierce pain tingled unbearably. She had reached out for the nearest help, and he gave of his strength and courage abundantly.  Presently the prickling of the flowing blood grew less sharp. She began to grow drowsy with warmth after the fatigue and pain. The big eyes shut, fluttered open, smiled at him, and again closed. She had fallen asleep from sheer exhaustion.  He looked down with an odd queer feeling at the small aristocratic face relaxed upon his ann. The long lashes had drooped to the cheeks and shuttered the eyes that had met his with such confident appeal, but they did not hide the dark rings underneath, born of the hardships she had endured. As he walked the floor with her, he lived once more the terrible struggle through which they had passed. He saw Death stretching out icy hands for her, and as his arms unconsciously tightened about the soft rounded body, his square jaw set and the fighting spark leaped to his eyes.  “No, by Heaven,” he gave back aloud his defiance.  Troubled dreams pursued her in her sleep. She clung close to him, her arm creeping round his neck for safety. He was a man not given to fine scruples, but all the best in him responded to her unconscious trust.  It was so she found herself when she awakened, stiff from her cramped position. She slipped at once to the floor and sat there drying her lace skirts, the sweet piquancy of her childish face set out by the leaping fire-glow that lit and shadowed her delicate coloring. Outside in the gray darkness raged the death from which he had snatched her by a miracle. Beyond—a million miles away—the world whose claim had loosened on them was going through its routine of lies and love, of hypocrisies and heroisms. But here were just they two, flung back to the primordial type by the fierce battle for existence that had encompassed them—Adam and Eve in the garden, one to one, all else forgot, all other ties and obligations for the moment obliterated. Had they not struggled, heart beating against heart, with the breath of death icing them, and come out alive? Was their world not contracted to a space ten feet by twelve, shut in from every other planet by an illimitable stretch of storm?  “Where should I have been if you had not found me?” she murmured, her haunting eyes fixed on the flames.  “But I should have found you—no matter where you had been, I should have found you.”  The words seemed to leap from him of themselves. He was sure he had not meant to speak them, to voice so soon the claim that seemed to him so natural and reasonable.  She considered his words and found delight in acquiescing at once. The unconscious demand for life, for love, of her starved soul had never been gratified. But he had come to her through that fearful valley of death, because he must, because it had always been meant he should.  Her lustrous eyes, big with faith, looked up and met his.  The far, wise voices of the world were storm-deadened. They cried no warning to these drifting hearts. How should they know in that moment when their souls reached toward each other that the wisdom of the ages had decreed their yearning futile?     CHAPTER IV. FORT SALVATION   She must have fallen asleep there, for when she opened her eyes it was day. Underneath her was a lot of bedding he had found in the cabin, and tucked about her were the automobile rugs. For a moment her brain, still sodden with sleep, struggled helplessly with her surroundings. She looked at the smoky rafters without understanding, and her eyes searched the cabin wonderingly for her maid. When she remembered, her first thought was to look for the man. That he had gone, she saw with instinctive terror.  But not without leaving a message. She found his penciled note, weighted for security by a dollar, at the edge of the hearth.  “Gone on a foraging expedition. Back in an hour, Little Partner,” was all it said. The other man also had promised to be back in an hour, and he had not come, but the strong chirography of the note, recalling the resolut