Note from electronic text creator: I have compiled a word list with definitions of most of the Scottish words found in this work at the end of the book.  This list does not belong to the original work, but is designed to help with the conversations in broad Scots found in this work.  A further explanation of this list can be found towards the end of this document, preceding the word list.  There are two footnotes in this book which have been renumbered and placed at the end of the work.      DAVID ELGINBROD.  By George Macdonald, LL.D.     And gladly wolde he lerne and gladly teche.  CHAUCER.     TO THE MEMORY OF LADY NOEL BYRON, THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED, WITH A LOVE STRONGER THAN DEATH.     BOOK I.   TURRIEPUFFIT.   With him there was a Ploughman, was his brother.  A trewé swinker, and a good was he, Living in peace and perfect charity. God loved he best with all his trewé heart, At allé timés, were it gain or smart, And then his neighébour right as himselve.  CHAUCER.--Prologue to the Canterbury Tales.     CHAPTER I.  THE FIR-WOOD.       Of all the flowers in the mead, Then love I roost these flowers white and rede, Such that men callen daisies in our town.       I renne blithe As soon as ever the sun ginneth west, To see this flower, how it will go to rest, For fear of night, so hateth she darkness; Her cheer is plainly spread in the brightness Of the sunne, for there it will unclose.  CHAUCER--Prologue to the Legend of Good Women.   “Meg! whaur are ye gaein' that get, like a wull shuttle?  Come in to the beuk.”  Meg's mother stood at the cottage door, with arms akimbo and clouded brow, calling through the boles of a little forest of fir-trees after her daughter.  One would naturally presume that the phrase she employed, comparing her daughter's motions to those of a shuttle that had “gane wull,” or lost its way, implied that she was watching her as she threaded her way through the trees.  But although she could not see her, the fir-wood was certainly the likeliest place for her daughter to be in; and the figure she employed was not in the least inapplicable to Meg's usual mode of wandering through the trees, that operation being commonly performed in the most erratic manner possible.  It was the ordinary occupation of the first hour of almost every day of Margaret's life.  As soon as she woke in the morning, the fir-wood drew her towards it, and she rose and went. Through its crowd of slender pillars, she strayed hither and thither, in an aimless manner, as if resignedly haunting the neighbourhood of something she had lost, or, hopefully, that of a treasure she expected one day to find.  It did not seem that she had heard her mother's call, for no response followed; and Janet Elginbrod returned into the cottage, where David of the same surname, who was already seated at the white deal table with “the beuk,” or large family bible before him, straightway commenced reading a chapter in the usual routine from the Old Testament, the New being reserved for the evening devotions. The chapter was the fortieth of the prophet Isaiah; and as the voice of the reader re-uttered the words of old inspiration, one might have thought that it was the voice of the ancient prophet himself, pouring forth the expression of his own faith in his expostulations with the unbelief of his brethren.  The chapter finished--it is none of the shortest, and Meg had not yet returned--the two knelt, and David prayed thus:  “O Thou who holdest the waters in the hollow of ae han', and carriest the lambs o' thy own making in thy bosom with the other han', it would be altogether unworthy o' thee, and o' thy Maijesty o' love, to require o' us that which thou knowest we cannot bring unto thee, until thou enrich us with that same.  Therefore, like thine own bairns, we boo doon afore thee, an' pray that thou wouldst tak' thy wull o' us, thy holy an' perfect an' blessed wull o' us; for, O God, we are a' thine ain.  An' for oor lassie, wha's oot amo' thy trees, an' wha' we dinna think forgets her Maker, though she may whiles forget her prayers, Lord, keep her a bonnie lassie in thy sicht, as white and clean in thy een as she is fair an' halesome in oors; an' oh! we thank thee, Father in heaven, for giein' her to us. An' noo, for a' oor wrang-duins an' ill-min'ins, for a' oor sins and trespasses o' mony sorts, dinna forget them, O God, till thou pits them a' richt, an' syne exerceese thy michty power e'en ower thine ain sel, an' clean forget them a'thegither; cast them ahint thy back, whaur e'en thine ain een shall ne'er see them again, that we may walk bold an' upricht afore thee for evermore, an' see the face o' Him wha was as muckle God in doin' thy biddin', as gin he had been ordering' a' thing Himsel.  For his sake, Ahmen.”  I hope my readers will not suppose that I give this as a specimen of Scotch prayers.  I know better than that.  David was an unusual man, and his prayers were unusual prayers.  The present was a little more so in its style, from the fact that one of the subjects of it was absent, a circumstance that rarely happened.  But the degree of difference was too small to be detected by any but those who were quite accustomed to his forms of thought and expression.  How much of it Janet understood or sympathized with, it is difficult to say; for anything that could be called a thought rarely crossed the threshold of her utterance.  On this occasion, the moment the prayer was ended, she rose from her knees, smoothed down her check apron, and went to the door; where, shading her eyes from the sun with her hand, she peered from under its penthouse into the fir-wood, and said in a voice softened apparently by the exercise in which she had taken a silent share.  “Whaur can the lassie be?”  And where was the lassie?  In the fir-wood, to be sure, with the thousand shadows, and the sunlight through it all; for at this moment the light fell upon her far in its depths, and revealed her hastening towards the cottage in as straight a line as the trees would permit, now blotted out by a crossing shadow, and anon radiant in the sunlight, appearing and vanishing as she threaded the upright warp of the fir-wood.  It was morning all around her; and one might see that it was morning within her too, as, emerging at last in the small open space around the cottage, Margaret--I cannot call her Meg, although her mother does--her father always called her “Maggy, my doo,” Anglicé, dove--Margaret approached her mother with a bright healthful face, and the least possible expression of uneasiness on her fair forehead.  She carried a book in her hand.  “What gars ye gang stravaguin' that get, Meg, whan ye ken weel eneuch ye sud a' been in to worship lang syne?  An sae we maun hae worship our lanes for want o' you, ye hizzy!”  “I didna ken it was sae late, mither,” replied Margaret, in a submissive tone, musical in spite of the rugged dialect into which the sounds were fashioned.  “Nae dout!  Ye had yer brakfast, an' ye warna that hungry for the word.  But here comes yer father, and ye'll no mend for his flytin', I'se promise.”  “Hoots! lat the bairn alane, Janet, my woman.  The word'll be mair to her afore lang.”  “I wat she has a word o' her nain there.  What beuk hae ye gotten there, Meg?  Whaur got ye't?”  Had it not been for the handsome binding of the book in her daughter's hand, it would neither have caught the eye, nor roused the suspicions of Janet.  David glanced at the book in his turn, and a faint expression of surprise, embodied chiefly in the opening of his eyelids a little wider than usual, crossed his face.  But he only said with a smile:  “I didna ken that the tree o' knowledge, wi' sic fair fruit, grew in our wud, Maggy, my doo.”  “Whaur gat ye the beuk?” reiterated Janet.  Margaret's face was by this time the colour of the crimson boards of the volume in her hand, but she replied at once:  “I got it frae Maister Sutherlan', I reckon.”  Janet's first response was an inverted whistle; her next, another question:  “Maister Sutherlan'! wha's that o't?”  “Hoot, lass!” interposed David, “ye ken weel aneuch.  It's the new tutor lad, up at the hoose; a fine, douce, honest chield, an' weel-faured, forby.  Lat's see the bit beuky, lassie.”  Margaret handed it to her father.  “Col-e-ridge's Poems,” read David, with some difficulty.  “Tak' it hame direckly,” said Janet.  “Na, na,” said David; “a' the apples o' the tree o' knowledge are no stappit wi sut an stew; an' gin this ane be, she'll sune ken by the taste o't what's comin'.  It's no muckle o' an ill beuk 'at ye'll read, Maggy, my doo.”  “Guid preserve's, man!  I'm no sayin' it's an ill beuk.  But it's no richt to mak appintments wi' stranger lads i' the wud sae ear' i' the mornin'.  Is't noo, yersel, Meg?”  “Mither! mither!” said Margaret, and her eyes flashed through the watery veil that tried to hide them, “hoo can ye?  Ye ken yersel I had nae appintment wi' him or ony man.”  “Weel, weel!” said Janet; and, apparently either satisfied with or overcome by the emotion she had excited, she turned and went in to pursue her usual house-avocations; while David, handing the book to his daughter, went away down the path that led from the cottage door, in the direction of a road to be seen at a little distance through the trees, which surrounded the cottage on all sides. Margaret followed her mother into the cottage, and was soon as busy as she with her share of the duties of the household; but it was a good many minutes before the cloud caused by her mother's hasty words entirely disappeared from a forehead which might with especial justice be called the sky of her face.  Meantime David emerged upon the more open road, and bent his course, still through fir-trees, towards a house for whose sake alone the road seemed to have been constructed.     CHAPTER II.  DAVID ELGINBROD AND THE NEW TUTOR.       Concord between our wit and will Where highest notes to godliness are raised, And lowest sink not down to jot of ill.  What Languetus taught Sir Philip Sidney.   THE ARCADIA--Third Eclogue.   The House of Turriepuffit stood about a furlong from David's cottage.  It was the abode of the Laird, or landed proprietor, in whose employment David filled several offices ordinarily distinct. The estate was a small one, and almost entirely farmed by the owner himself; who, with David's help, managed to turn it to good account. Upon week-days, he appeared on horseback in a costume more fitted for following the plough; but he did not work with his own hands; and on Sundays was at once recognizable as a country gentleman.  David was his bailiff or grieve, to overlook the labourers on the estate; his steward to pay them, and keep the farm accounts; his head gardener--for little labour was expended in that direction, there being only one lady, the mistress of the house, and she no patroness of useless flowers: David was in fact the laird's general adviser and executor.  The laird's family, besides the lady already mentioned, consisted only of two boys, of the ages of eleven and fourteen, whom he wished to enjoy the same privileges he had himself possessed, and to whom, therefore, he was giving a classical and mathematical education, in view of the University, by means of private tutors; the last of whom--for the changes were not few, seeing the salary was of the smallest--was Hugh Sutherland, the young man concerning whom David Elginbrod has already given his opinion.  But notwithstanding the freedom he always granted his daughter, and his good opinion of Hugh as well, David could not help feeling a little anxious, in his walk along the road towards the house, as to what the apparent acquaintance between her and the new tutor might evolve; but he got rid of all the difficulty, as far as he was concerned, by saying at last:  “What richt hae I to interfere? even supposin' I wanted to interfere.  But I can lippen weel to my bonny doo; an' for the rest, she maun tak' her chance like the lave o's.  An' wha' kens but it micht jist be stan'in' afore Him, i' the very get that He meant to gang.  The Lord forgie me for speakin' o' chance, as gin I believed in ony sic havers.  There's no fear o' the lassie.  Gude mornin' t'ye, Maister Sutherlan'.  That's a braw beuk o' ballants ye gae the len' o' to my Maggy, this mornin', sir.”  Sutherland was just entering a side-door of the house when David accosted him.  He was not old enough to keep from blushing at David's words; but, having a good conscience, he was ready with a good answer.  “It's a good book, Mr. Elginbrod.  It will do her no harm, though it be ballads.”  “I'm in no dreed o' that, sir.  Bairns maun hae ballants.  An', to tell the truth, sir, I'm no muckle mair nor a bairn in that respeck mysel'.  In fac, this verra mornin', at the beuk, I jist thocht I was readin' a gran' godly ballant, an' it soundet nane the waur for the notion o't.”  “You should have been a poet yourself, Mr. Elginbrod.”  “Na, na; I ken naething aboot yer poetry.  I hae read auld John Milton ower an' ower, though I dinna believe the half o't; but, oh! weel I like some o' the bonny bitties at the en' o't.”  “Il Penseroso, for instance?”  “Is that hoo ye ca't?  I ken't weel by the sicht, but hardly by the soun'.  I aye missed the name o't, an' took to the thing itsel'. Eh, man!--I beg yer pardon, sir--but its wonnerfu' bonny!”  “I'll come in some evening, and we'll have a chat about it,” replied Sutherland. “I must go to my work now.”  “We'll a' be verra happy to see you, sir.  Good mornin', sir.”  “Good morning.”  David went to the garden, where there was not much to be done in the way of education at this season of the year; and Sutherland to the school-room, where he was busy, all the rest of the morning and part of the afternoon, with Caesar and Virgil, Algebra and Euclid; food upon which intellectual babes are reared to the stature of college youths.  Sutherland was himself only a youth; for he had gone early to college, and had not yet quite completed the curriculum.  He was now filling up with teaching, the recess between his third and his fourth winter at one of the Aberdeen Universities.  He was the son of an officer, belonging to the younger branch of a family of some historic distinction and considerable wealth.  This officer, though not far removed from the estate and title as well, had nothing to live upon but his half-pay; for, to the disgust of his family, he had married a Welsh girl of ancient descent, in whose line the poverty must have been at least coeval with the history, to judge from the perfection of its development in the case of her father; and his relations made this the excuse for quarrelling with him; so relieving themselves from any obligations they might have been supposed to lie under, of rendering him assistance of some sort or other.  This, however, rather suited the temperament of Major Robert Sutherland, who was prouder in his poverty than they in their riches.  So he disowned them for ever, and accommodated himself, with the best grace in the world, to his yet more straitened circumstances.  He resolved, however, cost what it might in pinching and squeezing, to send his son to college before turning him out to shift for himself.  In this Mrs. Sutherland was ready to support him to the utmost; and so they had managed to keep their boy at college for three sessions; after the last of which, instead of returning home, as he had done on previous occasions, he had looked about him for a temporary engagement as tutor, and soon found the situation he now occupied in the family of William Glasford, Esq., of Turriepuffit, where he intended to remain no longer than the commencement of the session, which would be his fourth and last.  To what he should afterwards devote himself he had by no means made up his mind, except that it must of necessity be hard work of some kind or other.  So he had at least the virtue of desiring to be independent.  His other goods and bads must come out in the course of the story.  His pupils were rather stupid and rather good-natured; so that their temperament operated to confirm their intellectual condition, and to render the labour of teaching them considerably irksome.  But he did his work tolerably well, and was not so much interested in the result as to be pained at the moderate degree of his success.  At the time of which I write, however, the probability as to his success was scarcely ascertained, for he had been only a fortnight at the task.  It was the middle of the month of April, in a rather backward season.  The weather had been stormy, with frequent showers of sleet and snow.  Old winter was doing his best to hold young Spring back by the skirts of her garment, and very few of the wild flowers had yet ventured to look out of their warm beds in the mould. Sutherland, therefore, had made but few discoveries in the neighbourhood.  Not that the weather would have kept him to the house, had he had any particular desire to go out; but, like many other students, he had no predilection for objectless exertion, and preferred the choice of his own weather indoors, namely, from books and his own imaginings, to an encounter with the keen blasts of the North, charged as they often were with sharp bullets of hail.  When the sun did shine out between the showers, his cold glitter upon the pools of rain or melted snow, and on the wet evergreens and gravel walks, always drove him back from the window with a shiver.  The house, which was of very moderate size and comfort, stood in the midst of plantations, principally of Scotch firs and larches, some of the former old and of great growth, so that they had arrived at the true condition of the tree, which seems to require old age for the perfection of its idea.  There was very little to be seen from the windows except this wood, which, somewhat gloomy at almost any season, was at the present cheerless enough; and Sutherland found it very dreary indeed, as exchanged for the wide view from his own home on the side of an open hill in the Highlands.  In the midst of circumstances so uninteresting, it is not to be wondered at, that the glimpse of a pretty maiden should, one morning, occasion him some welcome excitement.  Passing downstairs to breakfast, he observed the drawing-room door ajar, and looked in to see what sort of a room it was; for so seldom was it used that he had never yet entered it.  There stood a young girl, peeping, with mingled curiosity and reverence, into a small gilt-leaved volume, which she had lifted from the table by which she stood.  He watched her for a moment with some interest; when she, seeming to become mesmerically aware that she was not alone, looked up, blushed deeply, put down the book in confusion, and proceeded to dust some of the furniture.  It was his first sight of Margaret.  Some of the neighbours were expected to dinner, and her aid was in requisition to get the grand room of the house prepared for the occasion.  He supposed her to belong to the household, till, one day, feeling compelled to go out for a stroll, he caught sight of her so occupied at the door of her father's cottage, that he perceived at once that must be her home: she was, in fact, seated upon a stool, paring potatoes.  She saw him as well, and, apparently ashamed at the recollection of having been discovered idling in the drawing-room, rose and went in.  He had met David once or twice about the house, and, attracted by his appearance, had had some conversation with him; but he did not know where he lived, nor that he was the father of the girl whom he had seen.     CHAPTER III.  THE DAISY AND THE PRIMROSE.  Dear secret Greenness, nursed below   Tempests and winds and winter nights! Vex not that but one sees thee grow;   That One made all these lesser lights.  HENRY VAUGHAN.   It was, of course, quite by accident that Sutherland had met Margaret in the fir-wood.  The wind had changed during the night, and swept all the clouds from the face of the sky; and when he looked out in the morning, he saw the fir-tops waving in the sunlight, and heard the sound of a south-west wind sweeping through them with the tune of running waters in its course.  It is a well-practised ear that can tell whether the sound it hears be that of gently falling waters, or of wind flowing through the branches of firs.  Sutherland's heart, reviving like a dormouse in its hole, began to be joyful at the sight of the genial motions of Nature, telling of warmth and blessedness at hand.  Some goal of life, vague but sure, seemed to glimmer through the appearances around him, and to stimulate him to action.  Be dressed in haste, and went out to meet the Spring.  He wandered into the heart of the wood.  The sunlight shone like a sunset upon the red trunks and boughs of the old fir-trees, but like the first sunrise of the world upon the new green fringes that edged the young shoots of the larches.  High up, hung the memorials of past summers in the rich brown tassels of the clustering cones; while the ground under foot was dappled with sunshine on the fallen fir-needles, and the great fallen cones which had opened to scatter their autumnal seed, and now lay waiting for decay.  Overhead, the tops whence they had fallen, waved in the wind, as in welcome of the Spring, with that peculiar swinging motion which made the poets of the sixteenth century call them “sailing pines.”  The wind blew cool, but not cold; and was filled with a delicious odour from the earth, which Sutherland took as a sign that she was coming alive at last.  And the Spring he went out to meet, met him.  For, first, at the foot of a tree, he spied a tiny primrose, peeping out of its rough, careful leaves; and he wondered how, by any metamorphosis, such leaves could pass into such a flower.  Had he seen the mother of the next spring-messenger he was about to meet, the same thought would have returned in another form.  For, next, as he passed on with the primrose in his hand, thinking it was almost cruel to pluck it, the Spring met him, as if in her own shape, in the person of Margaret, whom he spied a little way off, leaning against the stem of a Scotch fir, and looking up to its top swaying overhead in the first billows of the outburst ocean of life.  He went up to her with some shyness; for the presence of even a child-maiden was enough to make Sutherland shy--partly from the fear of startling her shyness, as one feels when drawing near a couching fawn.  But she, when she heard his footsteps, dropped her eyes slowly from the tree-top, and, as if she were in her own sanctuary, waited his approach.  He said nothing at first, but offered her, instead of speech, the primrose he had just plucked, which she received with a smile of the eyes only, and the sweetest “thank you, sir,” he had ever heard.  But while she held the primrose in her hand, her eyes wandered to the book which, according to his custom, Sutherland had caught up as he left the house.  It was the only well-bound book in his possession; and the eyes of Margaret, not yet tutored by experience, naturally expected an entrancing page within such beautiful boards; for the gayest bindings she had seen, were those of a few old annuals up at the house--and were they not full of the most lovely tales and pictures? In this case, however, her expectation was not vain; for the volume was, as I have already disclosed, Coleridge's Poems.  Seeing her eyes fixed upon the book--“Would you like to read it?”  said he.  “If you please, sir,” answered Margaret, her eyes brightening with the expectation of deliglit.  “Are you fond of poetry?”  Her face fell.  The only poetry she knew was the Scotch Psalms and Paraphrases, and such last-century verses as formed the chief part of the selections in her school-books; for this was a very retired parish, and the newer books had not yet reached its school.  She had hoped chiefly for tales.  “I dinna ken much about poetry,” she answered, trying to speak English. “There's an old book o't on my father's shelf; but the letters o't are auld-fashioned, an' I dinna care aboot it.”  “But this is quite easy to read, and very beautiful,” said Hugh.  The girl's eyes glistened for a moment, and this was all her reply.  “Would you like to read it?” resumed Hugh, seeing no further answer was on the road.  She held out her hand towards the volume.  When he, in his turn, held the volume towards her hand, she almost snatched it from him, and ran towards the house, without a word of thanks or leave-taking--whether from eagerness, or doubt of the propriety of accepting the offer, Hugh could not conjecture.  He stood for some moments looking after her, and then retraced his steps towards the house.  It would have been something, in the monotony of one of the most trying of positions, to meet one who snatched at the offered means of spiritual growth, even if that disciple had not been a lovely girl, with the woman waking in her eyes.  He commenced the duties of the day with considerably more of energy than he had yet brought to bear on his uninteresting pupils; and this energy did not flag before its effects upon the boys began to react in fresh impulse upon itself.     CHAPTER IV.  THE COTTAGE.  O little Bethlem! poor in walls,   But rich in furniture.  JOHN MASON'S Spiritual Songs.   There was one great alleviation to the various discomforts of Sutherland's tutor-life.  It was, that, except during school-hours, he was expected to take no charge whatever of his pupils.  They ran wild all other times; which was far better, in every way, both for them and for him.  Consequently, he was entirely his own master beyond the fixed margin of scholastic duties; and he soon found that his absence, even from the table, was a matter of no interest to the family.  To be sure, it involved his own fasting till the next meal-time came round--for the lady was quite a household martinet; but that was his own concern.  That very evening, he made his way to David's cottage, about the country supper-time, when he thought he should most likely find him at home.  It was a clear, still, moonlit night, with just an air of frost.  There was light enough for him to see that the cottage was very neat and tidy, looking, in the midst of its little forest, more like an English than a Scotch habitation.  He had had the advantage of a few months' residence in a leafy region on the other side of the Tweed, and so was able to make the comparison.  But what a different leafage that was from this!  That was soft, floating, billowy; this hard, stiff, and straight-lined, interfering so little with the skeleton form, that it needed not to be put off in the wintry season of death, to make the trees in harmony with the landscape.  A light was burning in the cottage, visible through the inner curtain of muslin, and the outer one of frost.  As he approached the door, he heard the sound of a voice; and from the even pitch of the tone, he concluded at once that its owner was reading aloud.  The measured cadence soon convinced him that it was verse that was being read; and the voice was evidently that of David, and not of Margaret.  He knocked at the door.  The voice ceased, chairs were pushed back, and a heavy step approached.  David opened the door himself.  “Eh!  Maister Sutherlan',” said he, “I thocht it micht aiblins be yersel.  Ye're welcome, sir.  Come butt the hoose.  Our place is but sma', but ye'll no min' sitttin' doon wi' our ain sels.  Janet, ooman, this is Maister Sutherlan'.  Maggy, my doo, he's a frien' o' yours, o' a day auld, already.  Ye're kindly welcome, Maister Sutherlan'.  I'm sure it's verra kin' o' you to come an' see the like o' huz.”  As Hugh entered, he saw his own bright volume lying on the table, evidently that from which David had just been reading.  Margaret had already placed for him a cushioned arm-chair, the only comfortable one in the house; and presently, the table being drawn back, they were all seated round the peat-fire on the hearth, the best sort for keeping feet warm at least.  On the crook, or hooked iron-chain suspended within the chimney, hung a three-footed pot, in which potatoes were boiling away merrily for supper.  By the side of the wide chimney, or more properly lum, hung an iron lamp, of an old classical form common to the country, from the beak of which projected, almost horizontally, the lighted wick--the pith of a rush.  The light perched upon it was small but clear, and by it David had been reading.  Margaret sat right under it, upon a creepie, or small three-legged wooden stool.  Sitting thus, with the light falling on her from above, Hugh could not help thinking she looked very pretty.  Almost the only object in the distance from which the feeble light was reflected, was the patch-work counterpane of a little bed filling a recess in the wall, fitted with doors which stood open.  It was probably Margaret's refuge for the night.  “Well,” said the tutor, after they had been seated a few minutes, and had had some talk about the weather--surely no despicable subject after such a morning--the first of Spring--“well, how do you like the English poet, Mr. Elginbrod?”  “Spier that at me this day week, Maister Sutherlan', an' I'll aiblins answer ye; but no the nicht, no the nicht.”  “What for no?” said Hugh, taking up the dialect.  “For ae thing, we're nae clean through wi' the auld sailor's story yet; an' gin I hae learnt ae thing aboon anither, its no to pass jeedgment upo' halves.  I hae seen ill weather half the simmer, an' a thrang corn-yard after an' a', an' that o' the best.  No that I'm ill pleased wi' the bonny ballant aither.”  “Weel, will ye jist lat me read the lave o't till ye?”  “Wi' muckle pleesur, sir, an' mony thanks.”  He showed Hugh how far they had got in the reading of the “Ancient Mariner”; whereupon he took up the tale, and carried it on to the end.  He had some facility in reading with expression, and his few affectations--for it must be confessed he was not free of such faults--were not of a nature to strike uncritical hearers.  When he had finished, he looked up, and his eye chancing to light upon Margaret first, he saw that her cheek was quite pale, and her eyes overspread with the film, not of coming tears, but of emotion notwithstanding.  “Well,” said Hugh, again, willing to break the silence, and turning towards David, “what do you think of it now you have heard it all?”  Whether Janet interrupted her husband or not, I cannot tell; but she certainly spoke first:  “Tshâvah!”--equivalent to pshaw--“it's a' lees.  What for are ye knittin' yer broos ower a leein' ballant--a' havers as weel as lees?”  “I'm no jist prepared to say sae muckle, Janet,” replied David; “there's mony a thing 'at's lees, as ye ca't, 'at's no lees a' through.  Ye see, Maister Sutherlan', I'm no gleg at the uptak, an' it jist taks me twise as lang as ither fowk to see to the ootside o' a thing.  Whiles a sentence 'ill leuk to me clean nonsense a'thegither; an' maybe a haill ook efter, it'll come upo' me a' at ance; an' fegs! it's the best thing in a' the beuk.”  Margaret's eyes were fixed on her father with a look which I can only call faithfulness, as if every word he spoke was truth, whether she could understand it or not.  “But perhaps we may look too far for meanings sometimes,” suggested Sutherland.  “Maybe, maybe; but when a body has a suspeecion o' a trowth, he sud never lat sit till he's gotten eyther hit, or an assurance that there's nothing there.  But there's jist ae thing, in the poem 'at I can pit my finger upo', an' say 'at it's no richt clear to me whether it's a' straucht-foret or no?”  “What's that, Mr. Elginbrod?”  “It's jist this--what for a' thae sailor-men fell doon deid, an' the chield 'at shot the bonnie burdie, an' did a' the mischeef, cam' to little hurt i' the 'en--comparateevely.”  “Well,” said Hugh, “I confess I'm not prepared to answer the question.  If you get any light on the subject”--  “Ow, I daursay I may.  A heap o' things comes to me as I'm takin' a daunder by mysel' i' the gloamin'.  I'll no say a thing's wrang till I hae tried it ower an' ower; for maybe I haena a richt grip o' the thing ava.”  “What can ye expec, Dawvid, o' a leevin' corp, an' a' that?--ay, twa hunner corps--fower times fifty's twa hunner--an' angels turnin' sailors, an' sangs gaein fleein' aboot like laverocks, and tummelin' doon again, tired like?--Gude preserve's a'!”  “Janet, do ye believe 'at ever a serpent spak?”  “Hoot!  Dawvid, the deil was in him, ye ken.”  “The deil a word o' that's i' the word itsel, though,” rejoined David with a smile.  “Dawvid,” said Janet, solemnly, and with some consternation, “ye're no gaein' to tell me, sittin' there, at ye dinna believe ilka word 'at's prentit atween the twa brods o' the Bible?  What will Maister Sutherlan' think o' ye?”  “Janet, my bonnie lass--” and here David's eyes beamed upon his wife--“I believe as mony o' them as ye do, an' maybe a wheen mair, my dawtie.  Keep yer min' easy aboot that.  But ye jist see 'at fowk warna a'thegither saitisfeed aboot a sairpent speikin', an' sae they leukit aboot and aboot till at last they fand the deil in him.  Gude kens whether he was there or no.  Noo, ye see hoo, gin we was to leuk weel aboot thae corps, an' thae angels, an' a' that queer stuff--but oh! it's bonny stuff tee!--we micht fa' in wi' something we didna awthegither expec, though we was leukin' for't a' the time. Sae I maun jist think aboot it, Mr. Sutherlan'; an' I wad fain read it ower again, afore I lippen on giein' my opingan on the maitter. Ye cud lave the bit beukie, sir?  We'se tak' guid care o't.”  “Ye're verra welcome to that or ony ither beuk I hae,” replied Hugh, who began to feel already as if he were in the hands of a superior.  “Mony thanks; but ye see, sir, we hae eneuch to chow upo' for an aucht days or so.”  By this time the potatoes wore considered to be cooked, and were accordingly lifted off the fire.  The water was then poured away, the lid put aside, and the pot hung once more upon the crook, hooked a few rings further up in the chimney, in order that the potatoes might be thoroughly dry before they were served.  Margaret was now very busy spreading the cloth and laying spoon and plates on the table.  Hugh rose to go.  “Will ye no bide,” said Janet, in a most hospitable tone, “an' tak' a het pitawta wi' us?”  “I'm afraid of being troublesome,” answered he.  “Nae fear o' that, gin ye can jist pit up wi' oor hamely meat.”  “Mak nae apologies, Janet, my woman,” said David. “A het pitawta's aye guid fare, for gentle or semple.  Sit ye doun again, Maister Sutherlan'.  Maggy, my doo, whaur's the milk?”  “I thocht Hawkie wad hae a drappy o' het milk by this time,” said Margaret, “and sae I jist loot it be to the last; but I'll hae't drawn in twa minutes.”  And away she went with a jug, commonly called a decanter in that part of the north, in her hand.  “That's hardly fair play to Hawkie,” said David to Janet with a smile.  “Hoot!  Dawvid, ye see we haena a stranger ilka nicht.”  “But really,” said Hugh, “I hope this is the last time you will consider me a stranger, for I shall be here a great many times--that is, if you don't get tired of me.”  “Gie us the chance at least, Maister Sutherlan'.  It's no sma' preevilege to fowk like us to hae a frien' wi' sae muckle buik learnin' as ye hae, sir.”  “I am afraid it looks more to you than it really is.”  “Weel, ye see, we maun a' leuk at the starns frae the hicht o' oor ain een.  An' ye seem nigher to them by a lang growth than the lave o's.  My man, ye ought to be thankfu'.”  With the true humility that comes of worshipping the Truth, David had not the smallest idea that he was immeasurably nearer to the stars than Hugh Sutherland.  Maggie having returned with her jug full of frothy milk, and the potatoes being already heaped up in a wooden bowl or bossie in the middle of the table, sending the smoke of their hospitality to the rafters, Janet placed a smaller wooden bowl, called a caup, filled with deliciously yellow milk of Hawkie's latest gathering, for each individual of the company, with an attendant horn-spoon by its side. They all drew their chairs to the table, and David, asking no blessing, as it was called, but nevertheless giving thanks for the blessing already bestowed, namely, the perfect gift of food, invited Hugh to make a supper.  Each, in primitive but not ungraceful fashion, took a potatoe from the dish with the fingers, and ate it, “bite and sup,” with the help of the horn-spoon for the milk.  Hugh thought he had never supped more pleasantly, and could not help observing how far real good-breeding is independent of the forms and refinements of what has assumed to itself the name of society.  Soon after supper was over, it was time for him to go; so, after kind hand-shakings and good nights, David accompanied him to the road, where he left him to find his way home by the star-light.  As he went, he could not help pondering a little over the fact that a labouring man had discovered a difficulty, perhaps a fault, in one of his favourite poems, which had never suggested itself to him.  He soon satisfied himself, however, by coming to the conclusion that the poet had not cared about the matter at all, having had no further intention in the poem than Hugh himself had found in it, namely, witchery and loveliness.  But it seemed to the young student a wonderful fact, that the intercourse which was denied him in the laird's family, simply from their utter incapacity of yielding it, should be afforded him in the family of a man who had followed the plough himself once, perhaps did so still, having risen only to be the overseer and superior assistant of labourers.  He certainly felt, on his way home, much more reconciled to the prospect of his sojourn at Turriepuffit, than he would have thought it possible he ever should.  David lingered a few moments, looking up at the stars, before he re-entered his cottage.  When he rejoined his wife and child, he found the Bible already open on the table for their evening devotions.  I will close this chapter, as I began the first, with something like his prayer.  David's prayers were characteristic of the whole man; but they also partook, in far more than ordinary, of the mood of the moment.  His last occupation had been star-gazing:  “O thou, wha keeps the stars alicht, an' our souls burnin' wi' a licht aboon that o' the stars, grant that they may shine afore thee as the stars for ever and ever.  An' as thou hauds the stars burnin' a' the nicht, whan there's no man to see, so haud thou the licht burnin' in our souls, whan we see neither thee nor it, but are buried in the grave o' sleep an' forgetfu'ness.  Be thou by us, even as a mother sits by the bedside o' her ailin' wean a' the lang nicht; only be thou nearer to us, even in our verra souls, an' watch ower the warl' o' dreams that they mak' for themsels.  Grant that more an' more thochts o' thy thinkin' may come into our herts day by day, till there shall be at last an open road atween thee an' us, an' thy angels may ascend and descend upon us, so that we may be in thy heaven, e'en while we are upo' thy earth: Amen.”     CHAPTER V.  THE STUDENTS.  In wood and stone, not the softest, but hardest, be always aptest for portraiture, both fairest for pleasure, and most durable for profit.  Hard wits be hard to receive, but sure to keep; painful without weariness, heedful without wavering, constant without new-fangleness; bearing heavy things, though not lightly, yet willingly; entering hard things, though not easily, yet deeply; and so come to that perfectness of learning in the end, that quick wits seem in hope but do not in deed, or else very seldom ever attain unto.--ROGER ASCHAM.--The Schoolmaster.  Two or three very simple causes united to prevent Hugh from repeating his visit to David so soon as he would otherwise have done.  One was, that, the fine weather continuing, he was seized with the desire of exploring the neighbourhood.  The spring, which sets some wild animals to the construction of new dwellings, incites man to the enlarging of his, making, as it were, by discovery, that which lies around him his own.  So he spent the greater parts of several evenings in wandering about the neighbourhood; till at length the moonlight failed him.  Another cause was, that, in the act of searching for some books for his boys, in an old garret of the house, which was at once lumber room and library, he came upon some stray volumes of the Waverley novels, with which he was as yet only partially acquainted.  These absorbed many of his spare hours. But one evening, while reading the Heart of Midlothian, the thought struck him--what a character David would have been for Sir Walter. Whether he was right or not is a question; but the notion brought David so vividly before him, that it roused the desire to see him. He closed the book at once, and went to the cottage.  “We're no lik'ly to ca' ye onything but a stranger yet, Maister Sutherlan',” said David, as he entered.  “I've been busy since I saw you,” was all the excuse Hugh offered.  “Weel, ye'r welcome noo; and ye've jist come in time after a', for it's no that mony hours sin' I fand it oot awthegither to my ain settisfaction.”  “Found out what?” said Hugh; for he had forgotten all about the perplexity in which he had left David, and which had been occupying his thoughts ever since their last interview.  “Aboot the cross-bow an' the birdie, ye ken,” answered David, in a tone of surprise.  “Yes, to be sure.  How stupid of me!” said Hugh.  “Weel, ye see, the meanin' o' the haill ballant is no that ill to win at, seein' the poet himsel' tells us that.  It's jist no to be proud or ill-natured to oor neebours, the beasts and birds, for God made ane an' a' o's.  But there's harder things in't nor that, and yon's the hardest.  But ye see it was jist an unlucky thochtless deed o' the puir auld sailor's, an' I'm thinkin' he was sair reprocht in's hert the minit he did it.  His mates was fell angry at him, no for killin' the puir innocent craytur, but for fear o' ill luck in consequence.  Syne when nane followed, they turned richt roun', an' took awa' the character o' the puir beastie efter 'twas deid.  They appruved o' the verra thing 'at he was nae doot sorry for.--But onything to haud aff o' themsels!  Nae suner cam the calm, than roun' they gaed again like the weathercock, an' naething wad content them bit hingin' the deid craytur about the auld man's craig, an' abusin' him forby.  Sae ye see hoo they war a wheen selfish crayturs, an' a hantle waur nor the man 'at was led astray into an ill deed.  But still he maun rue't.  Sae Death got them, an' a kin' o' leevin' Death, a she Death as 'twar, an' in some respecks may be waur than the ither, got grips o' him, puir auld body!  It's a' fair and richt to the backbane o' the ballant, Maister Sutherlan', an' that I'se uphaud.”  Hugh could not help feeling considerably astonished to hear this criticism from the lips of one whom he considered an uneducated man. For he did not know that there are many other educations besides a college one, some of them tending far more than that to develope the common-sense, or faculty of judging of things by their nature.  Life intelligently met and honestly passed, is the best education of all; except that higher one to which it is intended to lead, and to which it had led David.  Both these educations, however, were nearly unknown to the student of books.  But he was still more astonished to hear from the lips of Margaret, who was sitting by:  “That's it, father; that's it!  I was jist ettlin' efter that same thing mysel, or something like it, but ye put it in the richt words exackly.”  The sound of her voice drew Hugh's eyes upon her: he was astonished at the alteration in her countenance.  While she spoke it was absolutely beautiful.  As soon as she ceased speaking, it settled back into its former shadowless calm.  Her father gave her one approving glance and nod, expressive of no surprise at her having approached the same discovery as himself, but testifying pleasure at the coincidence of their opinions.  Nothing was left for Hugh but to express his satisfaction with the interpretation of the difficulty, and to add, that the poem would henceforth possess fresh interest for him.  After this, his visits became more frequent; and at length David made a request which led to their greater frequency still.  It was to this effect:  “Do ye think, Mr. Sutherlan', I could do onything at my age at the mathematics?  I unnerstan' weel eneuch hoo to measur' lan', an' that kin' o' thing.  I jist follow the rule.  But the rule itsel's a puzzler to me.  I dinna understan' it by half.  Noo it seems to me that the best o' a rule is, no to mak ye able to do a thing, but to lead ye to what maks the rule richt--to the prenciple o' the thing. It's no 'at I'm misbelievin' the rule, but I want to see the richts o't.”  “I've no doubt you could learn fast enough,” replied Hugh. “I shall be very happy to help you with it.”  “Na, na; I'm no gaein to trouble you.  Ye hae eneuch to do in that way.  But if ye could jist spare me ane or twa o' yer beuks whiles--ony o' them 'at ye think proper, I sud be muckle obleeged te ye.”  Hugh promised and fulfilled; but the result was, that, before long, both the father and the daughter were seated at the kitchen-table, every evening, busy with Euclid and Algebra; and that, on most evenings, Hugh was present as their instructor.  It was quite a new pleasure to him.  Few delights surpass those of imparting knowledge to the eager recipient.  What made Hugh's tutor-life irksome, was partly the excess of his desire to communicate, over the desire of his pupils to partake.  But here there was no labour.  All the questions were asked by the scholars.  A single lesson had not passed, however, before David put questions which Hugh was unable to answer, and concerning which he was obliged to confess his ignorance.  Instead of being discouraged, as eager questioners are very ready to be when they receive no answer, David merely said, “Weel, weel, we maun bide a wee,” and went on with what he was able to master.  Meantime Margaret, though forced to lag a good way behind her father, and to apply much more frequently to their tutor for help, yet secured all she got; and that is great praise for any student.  She was not by any means remarkably quick, but she knew when she did not understand; and that is a sure and indispensable step towards understanding.  It is indeed a rarer gift than the power of understanding itself.  The gratitude of David was too deep to be expressed in any formal thanks.  It broke out at times in two or three simple words when the conversation presented an opportunity, or in the midst of their work, as by its own self-birth, ungenerated by association.  During the lesson, which often lasted more than two hours, Janet would be busy about the room, and in and out of it, with a manifest care to suppress all unnecessary bustle.  As soon as Hugh made his appearance, she would put off the stout shoes--man's shoes, as we should consider them--which she always wore at other times, and put on a pair of bauchles; that is, an old pair of her Sunday shoes, put down at heel, and so converted into slippers, with which she could move about less noisily.  At times her remarks would seem to imply that she considered it rather absurd in her husband to trouble himself with book-learning; but evidently on the ground that he knew everything already that was worthy of the honour of his acquaintance; whereas, with regard to Margaret, her heart was as evidently full of pride at the idea of the education her daughter was getting from the laird's own tutor.  Now and then she would stand still for a moment, and gaze at them, with her bright black eyes, from under the white frills of her mutch, her bare brown arms akimbo, and a look of pride upon her equally brown honest face.  Her dress consisted of a wrapper, or short loose jacket, of printed calico, and a blue winsey petticoat, which she had a habit of tucking between her knees, to keep it out of harm's way, as often as she stooped to any wet work, or, more especially, when doing anything by the fire.  Margaret's dress was, in ordinary, like her mother's, with the exception of the cap; but, every evening, when their master was expected, she put off her wrapper, and substituted a gown of the same material, a cotton print; and so, with her plentiful dark hair gathered neatly under a net of brown silk, the usual head-dress of girls in her position, both in and out of doors, sat down dressed for the sacrament of wisdom.  David made no other preparation than the usual evening washing of his large well-wrought hands, and bathing of his head, covered with thick dark hair, plentifully lined with grey, in a tub of cold water; from which his face, which was “cremsin dyed ingrayne” by the weather, emerged glowing.  He sat down at the table in his usual rough blue coat and plain brass buttons; with his breeches of broad-striped corduroy, his blue-ribbed stockings, and leather gaiters, or cuiticans, disposed under the table, and his shoes, with five rows of broad-headed nails in the soles, projecting from beneath it on the other side; for he was a tall man--six feet still, although five-and-fifty, and considerably bent in the shoulders with hard work.  Sutherland's style was that of a gentleman who must wear out his dress-coat.  Such was the group which, three or four evenings in the week, might be seen in David Elginbrod's cottage, seated around the white deal table, with their books and slates upon it, and searching, by the light of a tallow candle, substituted as more convenient, for the ordinary lamp, after the mysteries of the universe.  The influences of reviving natu