STORIES ***      The Brick Moon and Other Stories  by EDWARD EVERETT HALE Short Story Index Reprint Series     Preface   To read these stories again, thirty and more years after they were written, is to recall many memories, sad or glad, with which this reader need not be interrupted. But I have to make sure that they are intelligible to readers of a generation later than that for which they were written.  The story of The Brick Moon was begun in my dear brother Nathan's working-room in Union College, Schenectady, in the year 1870, when he was professor of the English language there.  The account of the first plan of the moon is a sketch, as accurate as was needed, of the old chat and dreams, plans and jokes, of our college days, before he left Cambridge in 1838.  As I learned almost everything I know through his care and love and help, directly or indirectly, it is a pleasure to say this here.  The story was published in the "Atlantic Monthly," in 1870 and 1871.  It was the last story I wrote for that magazine, before assuming the charge of "Old and New," a magazine which I edited from 1870 to 1876, and for which I wrote "Ten Times One is Ten," which has been printed in the third volume of this series.  Among the kind references to "The Brick Moon" which I have received from sympathetic friends, I now recall with the greatest pleasure one sent me by Mr. Asaph Hall, the distinguished astronomer of the National Observatory. In sending me the ephemeris of the two moons of Mars, which he revealed to this world of ours, he wrote, "The smaller of these moons is the veritable Brick Moon." That, in the moment of triumph for the greatest astronomical discovery of a generation, Dr. Hall should have time or thought to give to my little parable,--this was praise indeed.  Writing in 1870, I said, as the reader will see on page 66, that George Orcutt did not tell how he used a magnifying power of 700.  Nor did I choose to tell then, hoping that in some fortunate winter I might be able myself to repeat his process, greatly to the convenience of astronomers who have not Alvan Clark's resources at hand, or who have to satisfy themselves with glass lenses of fifteen inches, or even thirty, in diameter.  But no such winter has come round to me, and I will now give Orcutt's invention to the world.  He had unlimited freezing power.  So have we now, as we had not then. With this power he made an ice lens, ten feet in diameter, which was easily rubbed, by the delicate hands of the careful women around him, to precisely the surface which he needed.  Let me hope that before next winter passes some countryman or countrywoman of mine will have equalled his success, and with an ice lens will surpass all the successes of the glasses of our time.  The plan of "Crusoe in New York" was made when I was enjoying the princely hospitality of Henry Whitney Bellows in New York.  The parsonage in that city commanded a view of a "lot" not built on, which would have given for many years a happy home to any disciple of Mayor Pingree, if a somewhat complicated social order had permitted.  The story was first published in Frank Leslie's illustrated paper.  In reading it in 1899, I am afraid that the readers of a hard, money generation may not know that "scrip" was in the sixties the name for small change.  I regard a knowledge of every detail of the original Robinson Crusoe as well-nigh a necessity in education. Girls  may occasionally be excused, but never boys.  It ought to be unnecessary, therefore, to say that some of the narrative passages of Crusoe in New York are taken, word for word, from the text of Defoe.  If I do state this for the benefit of a few unfortunate ladies who are not familiar with that text, it is because I think no one among many courteous critics has observed it.  "The Survivor's Story" is one of eight short stories which were published in the first Christmas number of "Old and New."  Of the other stories I think no explanation is needed, but such as was given at the time of their publication and is reprinted with each of them here.  EDWARD E. HALE. ROXBURY, July 6, 1899.    CONTENTS    THE BRICK MOON CRUSOE IN NEW YORK BREAD ON THE WATERS THE LOST PALACE 99 LINWOOD STREET IDEALS THANKSGIVING AT THE POLLS THE SURVIVOR'S STORY    THE BRICK MOON  [From the papers of Captain FREDERIC INGHAM.]  I  PREPARATION  I have no sort of objection now to telling the whole story.  The subscribers, of course, have a right to know what became of their money.  The astronomers may as well know all about it, before they announce any more asteroids with an enormous movement in declination.  And experimenters on the longitude may as well know, so that they may act advisedly in attempting another brick moon or in refusing to do so.  It all began more than thirty years ago, when we were in college; as most good things begin.  We were studying in the book which has gray sides and a green back, and is called "Cambridge Astronomy" because it is translated from the French.  We came across this business of the longitude, and, as we talked, in the gloom and glamour of the old South Middle dining-hall, we had going the usual number of students' stories about rewards offered by the Board of Longitude for discoveries in that matter,-- stories, all of which, so far as I know, are lies.  Like all boys, we had tried our hands at perpetual motion. For me, I was sure I could square the circle, if they would give me chalk enough.  But as to this business of the longitude, it was reserved for Q.[1] to make the happy hit and to explain it to the rest of us.   [1]  Wherever Q. is referred to in these pages my brother Nathan is meant.  One of his noms de plume was Gnat Q. Hale, because G and Q may be silent letters.   I wonder if I can explain it to an unlearned world, which has not studied the book with gray sides and a green cambric back.  Let us try.  You know then, dear world, that when you look at the North Star, it always appears to you at just the same height above the horizon or what is between you and the horizon: say the Dwight School-house, or the houses in Concord Street; or to me, just now, North College.  You know also that, if you were to travel to the North Pole, the North Star would be just over your head.  And, if you were to travel to the equator, it would be just on your horizon, if you could see it at all through the red, dusty, hazy mist in the north, as you could not.  If you were just half-way between pole and equator, on the line between us and Canada, the North Star would be half-way up, or 45@ from the horizon.  So you would know there that you were 45@ from the equator.  Then in Boston, you would find it was 42@ 20' from the horizon.  So you know there that you are 42@ 20' from the equator.  At Seattle again you would find it was 47@ 40' high, so our friends at Seattle know that they are at 47@ 40' from the equator.  The latitude of a place, in other words, is found very easily by any observation which shows how high the North Star is; if you do not want to measure the North Star, you may take any star when it is just to north of you, and measure its height; wait twelve hours, and if you can find it, measure its height again.  Split the difference, and that is the altitude of the pole, or the latitude of you, the observer.  "Of course we know this," says the graduating world. "Do you suppose that is what we borrow your book for, to have you spell out your miserable elementary astronomy?" At which rebuff I should shrink distressed, but that a chorus of voices an octave higher comes up with, "Dear Mr. Ingham, we are ever so much obliged to you; we did not know it at all before, and you make it perfectly clear."  Thank you, my dear, and you, and you.  We will not care what the others say.  If you do understand it, or do know it, it is more than Mr. Charles Reade knew, or he would not have made his two lovers on the island guess at their latitude, as they did.  If they had either of them been educated at a respectable academy for the Middle Classes, they would have fared better.  Now about the longitude.  The latitude, which you have found, measures your distance north or south from the equator or the pole.  To find your longitude, you want to find your distance east or west from the meridian of Greenwich.  Now, if any one would build a good tall tower at Greenwich, straight into the sky,--say a hundred miles into the sky,--of course if you and I were east or west of it, and could see it, we could tell how far east or west we were by measuring the apparent height of the tower above our horizon.  If we could see so far, when the lantern with a Drummond's light, "ever so bright," on the very top of the tower, appeared to be on our horizon, we should know we were eight hundred and seventy-three miles away from it. The top of the tower would answer for us as the North Star does when we are measuring the latitude.  If we were nearer, our horizon would make a longer angle with the line from the top to our place of vision.  If we were farther away, we should need a higher tower.  But nobody will build any such tower at Greenwich, or elsewhere on that meridian, or on any meridian.  You see that to be of use to the half the world nearest to it, it would have to be so high that the diameter of the world would seem nothing in proportion.  And then, for the other half of the world you would have to erect another tower as high on the other side.  It was this difficulty that made Q. suggest the expedient of the Brick Moon.  For you see that if, by good luck, there were a ring like Saturn's which stretched round the world, above Greenwich and the meridian of Greenwich, and if it would stay above Greenwich, turning with the world, any one who wanted to measure his longitude or distance from Greenwich would look out of window and see how high this ring was above his horizon.  At Greenwich it would be over his head exactly.  At New Orleans, which is quarter round the world from Greenwich, it would be just in his horizon.  A little west of New Orleans you would begin to look for the other half of the ring on the west instead of the east; and if you went a little west of the Feejee Islands the ring would be over your head again.  So if we only had a ring like that, not round the equator of the world,--as Saturn's ring is around Saturn,--but vertical to the plane of the equator, as the brass ring of an artificial globe goes, only far higher in proportion,-- "from that ring," said Q., pensively, "we could calculate the longitude."  Failing that, after various propositions, he suggested the Brick Moon.  The plan was this:  If from the surface of the earth, by a gigantic peashooter, you could shoot a pea upward from Greenwich, aimed northward as well as upward; if you drove it so fast and far that when its power of ascent was exhausted, and it began to fall, it should clear the earth, and pass outside the North Pole; if you had given it sufficient power to get it half round the earth without touching, that pea would clear the earth forever.  It would continue to rotate above the North Pole, above the Feejee Island place, above the South Pole and Greenwich, forever, with the impulse with which it had first cleared our atmosphere and attraction.  If only we could see that pea as it revolved in that convenient orbit, then we could measure the longitude from that, as soon as we knew how high the orbit was, as well as if it were the ring of Saturn.  "But a pea is so small!"  "Yes," said Q., "but we must make a large pea."  Then we fell to work on plans for making the pea very large and very light.  Large,--that it might be seen far away by storm-tossed navigators: light,--that it might be the easier blown four thousand and odd miles into the air; lest it should fall on the heads of the Greenlanders or the Patagonians; lest they should be injured and the world lose its new moon.  But, of course, all this lath- and-plaster had to be given up.  For the motion through the air would set fire to this moon just as it does to other aerolites, and all your lath-and-plaster would gather into a few white drops, which no Rosse telescope even could discern.  "No," said Q. bravely, "at the least it must be very substantial.  It must stand fire well, very well.  Iron will not answer.  It must be brick; we must have a Brick Moon."  Then we had to calculate its size.  You can see, on the old moon, an edifice two hundred feet long with any of the fine refractors of our day.  But no such refractors as those can be carried by the poor little fishermen whom we wanted to befriend, the bones of whose ships lie white on so many cliffs, their names unreported at any Lloyd's or by any Ross,  Themselves the owners and their sons the crew.  On the other hand, we did not want our moon two hundred and fifty thousand miles away, as the old moon is, which I will call the Thornbush moon, for distinction.  We did not care how near it was, indeed, if it were only far enough away to be seen, in practice, from almost the whole world.  There must be a little strip where they could not see it from the surface, unless we threw it infinitely high.  "But they need not look from the surface," said Q.; "they might climb to the mast-head. And if they did not see it at all, they would know that they were ninety degrees from the meridian."  This difficulty about what we call "the strip," however, led to an improvement in the plan, which made it better in every way.  It was clear that even if "the strip" were quite wide, the moon would have to be a good way off, and, in proportion, hard to see.  If, however, we would satisfy ourselves with a moon four thousand miles away, THAT could be seen on the earth's surface for three or four thousand miles on each side; and twice three thousand, or six thousand, is one fourth of the largest circumference of the earth.  We did not dare have it nearer than four thousand miles, since even at that distance it would be eclipsed three hours out of every night; and we wanted it bright and distinct, and not of that lurid, copper, eclipse color.  But at four thousand miles' distance the moon could be seen by a belt of observers six or eight thousand miles in diameter. "Start, then, two moons,"--this was my contribution to the plan.  "Suppose one over the meridian of Greenwich, and the other over that of New Orleans.  Take care that there is a little difference in the radii of their orbits, lest they `collide' some foul day.  Then, in most places, one or other, perhaps two will come in sight.  So much the less risk of clouds: and everywhere there may be one, except when it is cloudy.  Neither need be more than four thousand miles off; so much the larger and more beautiful will they be.  If on the old Thornbush moon old Herschel with his reflector could see a town-house two hundred feet long, on the Brick Moon young Herschel will be able to see a dab of mortar a foot and a half long, if he wants to.  And people without the reflector, with their opera-glasses, will be able to see sufficiently well."  And to this they agreed: that eventually there must be two Brick Moons.  Indeed, it were better that there should be four, as each must be below the horizon half the time.  That is only as many as Jupiter has.  But it was also agreed that we might begin with one.  Why we settled on two hundred feet of diameter I hardly know.  I think it was from the statement of dear John Farrar's about the impossibility of there being a state house two hundred feet long not yet discovered, on the sunny side of old Thornbush.  That, somehow, made two hundred our fixed point.  Besides, a moon of two hundred feet diameter did not seem quite unmanageable. Yet it was evident that a smaller moon would be of no use, unless we meant to have them near the world, when there would be so many that they would be confusing, and eclipsed most of the time.  And four thousand miles is a good way off to see a moon even two hundred feet in diameter.  Small though we made them on paper, these two- hundred-foot moons were still too much for us.  Of course we meant to build them hollow.  But even if hollow there must be some thickness, and the quantity of brick would at best be enormous.  Then, to get them up!  The pea- shooter, of course, was only an illustration.  It was long after that time that Rodman and other guns sent iron balls five or six miles in distance,--say two miles, more or less, in height.  Iron is much heavier than hollow brick, but you can build no gun with a bore of two hundred feet now,--far less could you then.  No.  Q. again suggested the method of shooting oft the moon.  It was not to be by any of your sudden explosions. It was to be done as all great things are done,--by the gradual and silent accumulation of power.  You all know that a flywheel--heavy, very heavy on the circumference, light, very light within it--was made to save up power, from the time when it was produced to the time when it was wanted.  Yes?  Then, before we began even to build the moon, before we even began to make the brick, we would build two gigantic fly-wheels, the diameter of each should be "ever so great," the circumference heavy beyond all precedent, and thundering strong, so that no temptation might burst it.  They should revolve, their edges nearly touching, in opposite directions, for years, if it were necessary, to accumulate power, driven by some waterfall now wasted to the world.  One should be a little heavier than the other.  When the Brick Moon was finished, and all was ready, IT should be gently rolled down a gigantic groove provided for it, till it lighted on the edge of both wheels at the same instant.  Of course it would not rest there, not the ten-thousandth part of a second.  It would be snapped upward, as a drop of water from a grindstone.  Upward and upward; but the heavier wheel would have deflected it a little from the vertical.  Upward and northward it would rise, therefore, till it had passed the axis of the world.  It would, of course, feel the world's attraction all the time, which would bend its flight gently, but still it would leave the world more and more behind.  Upward still, but now southward, till it had traversed more than one hundred and eighty degrees of a circle.  Little resistance, indeed, after it had cleared the forty or fifty miles of visible atmosphere.  "Now let it fall," said Q., inspired with the vision.  "Let it fall, and the sooner the better!  The curve it is now on will forever clear the world; and over the meridian of that lonely waterfall,--if only we have rightly adjusted the gigantic flies,--will forever revolve, in its obedient orbit, the--  BRICK MOON,  the blessing of all seamen,--as constant in all change as its older sister has been fickle, and the second cynosure of all lovers upon the waves, and of all girls left behind them."  "Amen," we cried, and then we sat in silence till the clock struck ten; then shook each other gravely by the hand, and left the South Middle dining- hall.  Of waterfalls there were plenty that we knew.  Fly-wheels could be built of oak and pine, and hooped with iron.  Fly-wheels did not discourage us.  But brick?  One brick is, say, sixty-four cubic inches only.  This moon,--though we made it hollow,-- see,--it must take twelve million brick.  The brick alone will cost sixty thousand dollars!   The brick alone would cost sixty thousand dollars. There the scheme of the Brick Moon hung, an airy vision, for seventeen years,--the years that changed us from young men into men.  The brick alone, sixty thousand dollars!  For, to boys who have still left a few of their college bills unpaid, who cannot think of buying that lovely little Elzevir which Smith has for sale at auction, of which Smith does not dream of the value, sixty thousand dollars seems as intangible as sixty million sestertia.  Clarke, second, how much are sixty million sestertia stated in cowries?  How much in currency, gold being at 1.37 1/4?  Right; go up.  Stop, I forget myself!  So, to resume, the project of the Brick Moon hung in the ideal, an airy vision, a vision as lovely and as distant as the Brick Moon itself, at this calm moment of midnight when I write, as it poises itself over the shoulder of Orion, in my southern horizon.  Stop!  I anticipate.  Let me keep--as we say in Beadle's Dime Series--to the even current of my story.  Seventeen years passed by, we were no longer boys, though we felt so.  For myself, to this hour, I never enter board meeting, committee meeting, or synod, without the queer question, what would happen should any one discover that this bearded man was only a big boy disguised? that the frockcoat and the round hat are none of mine, and that, if I should be spurned from the assembly, as an interloper, a judicious public, learning all the facts, would give a verdict, "Served him right." This consideration helps me through many bored meetings which would be else so dismal.  What did my old copy say?--  "Boards are made of wood, they are long and narrow."  But we do not get on!  Seventeen years after, I say, or should have said, dear Orcutt entered my room at Naguadavick again.  I had not seen him since the Commencement day when we parted at Cambridge.  He looked the same, and yet not the same.  His smile was the same, his voice, his tender look of sympathy when I spoke to him of a great sorrow, his childlike love of fun.  His waistband was different, his pantaloons were different, his smooth chin was buried in a full beard, and he weighed two hundred pounds if he weighed a gramme.  O, the good time we had, so like the times of old!  Those were happy days for me in Naguadavick.  At that moment my double was at work for me at a meeting of the publishing committee of the Sandemanian Review, so I called Orcutt up to my own snuggery, and we talked over old times; talked till tea was ready.  Polly came up through the orchard and made tea for us herself there.  We talked on and on, till nine, ten at night, and then it was that dear Orcutt asked me if I remembered the Brick Moon.  Remember it? of course I did.  And without leaving my chair I opened the drawer of my writing-desk, and handed him a portfolio full of working-drawings on which I had engaged myself for my "third"[1] all that winter.  Orcutt was delighted. He turned them over hastily but intelligently, and said: "I am so glad.  I could not think you had forgotten.  And I have seen Brannan, and Brannan has not forgotten." "Now do you know," said he, "in all this railroading of mine, I have not forgotten.  When I built the great tunnel for the Cattawissa and Opelousas, by which we got rid of the old inclined planes, there was never a stone bigger than a peach-stone within two hundred miles of us.  I baked the brick of that tunnel on the line with my own kilns.  Ingham, I have made more brick, I believe, than any man living in the world!"   [1]  "Every man," says Dr. Peabody, "should have a vocation and an avocation."  To which I add,"A third."   "You are the providential man," said I.  "Am I not, Fred?  More than that," said he; "I have succeeded in things the world counts worth more than brick.  I have made brick, and I have made money!"  "One of us make money?" asked I, amazed.  "Even so," said dear Orcutt; "one of us has, made money."  And he proceeded to tell me how.  It was not in building tunnels, nor in making brick.  No!  It was by buying up the original stock of the Cattawissa and Opelousas, at a moment when that stock had hardly a nominal price in the market.  There were the first mortgage bonds, and the second mortgage bonds, and the third, and I know not how much floating debt; and worse than all, the reputation of the road lost, and deservedly lost.  Every locomotive it had was asthmatic.  Every car it had bore the marks of unprecedented accidents, for which no one was to blame.  Rival lines, I know not how many, were cutting each other's throats for its legitimate business.  At this juncture dear George invested all his earnings as a contractor, in the despised original stock,--he actually bought it for 3 1/4 per cent,--good shares that had cost a round hundred to every wretch who had subscribed.  Six thousand eight hundred dollars--every cent he had--did George thus invest.  Then he went himself to the trustees of the first mortgage, to the trustees of the second, and to the trustees of the third, and told them what he had done.  Now it is personal presence that moves the world. Dear Orcutt has found that out since, if he did not know it before.  The trustees who would have sniffed had George written to them, turned round from their desks, and begged him to take a chair, when he came to talk with them.  Had he put every penny he was worth into that stock?  Then it was worth something which they did not know of, for George Orcutt was no fool about railroads. The man who bridged the Lower Rapidan when a freshet was running was no fool.  "What were his plans?"  George did not tell--no, not to lordly trustees--what his plans were.  He had plans, but he kept them to himself.  All he told them was that he had plans.  On those plans he had staked his all.  Now, would they or would they not agree to put him in charge of the running of that road, for twelve months, on a nominal salary? The superintendent they had had was a rascal.  He had proved that by running away.  They knew that George was not a rascal.  He knew that he could make this road pay expenses, pay bond-holders, and pay a dividend,--a thing no one else had dreamed of for twenty years.  Could they do better than try him?  Of course they could not, and they knew they could not.  Of course they sniffed and talked, and waited, and pretended they did not know, and that they must consult, and so forth and so on.  But of course they all did try him, on his own terms.  He was put in charge of the running of that road.  In one week he showed he should redeem it.  In three months he did redeem it!  He advertised boldly the first day: "Infant children at treble price."  The novelty attracted instant remark.  And it showed many things.  First, it showed he was a humane man, who wished to save human life.  He would leave these innocents in their cradles, where they belonged.  Second, and chiefly, the world of travellers saw that the Crichton, the Amadis, the perfect chevalier of the future, had arisen,--a railroad manager caring for the comfort of his passengers!  The first week the number of the C. and O.'s passengers was doubled: in a week or two more freight began to come in, in driblets, on the line which its owners had gone over.  As soon as the shops could turn them out, some cars were put on, with arms on which travellers could rest their elbows, with head-rests where they could take naps if they were weary.  These excited so much curiosity that one was exhibited in the museum at Cattawissa and another at Opelousas.  It may not be generally known that the received car of the American roads was devised to secure a premium offered by the Pawtucket and Podunk Company.  Their receipts were growing so large that they feared they should forfeit their charter.  They advertised, therefore, for a car in which no man could sleep at night or rest by day,--in which the backs should be straight, the heads of passengers unsupported, the feet entangled in a vice, the elbows always knocked by the passing conductor.  The pattern was produced which immediately came into use on all the American roads.  But on the Cattawissa and Opelousas this time-honored pattern was set aside.  Of course you see the result.  Men went hundreds of miles out of their way to ride on the C. and O.  The third mortgage was paid off; a reserve fund was piled up for the second; the trustees of the first lived in dread of being paid; and George's stock, which he bought at 3 1/4, rose to 147 before two years had gone by!  So was it that, as we sat together in the snuggery, George was worth well-nigh three hundred thousand dollars.  Some of his eggs were in the basket where they were laid; some he had taken out and placed in other baskets; some in nests where various hens were brooding over them.  Sound eggs they were, wherever placed; and such was the victory of which George had come to tell.  One of us had made money!  On his way he had seen Brannan.  Brannan, the pure- minded, right-minded, shifty man of tact, man of brain, man of heart, and man of word, who held New Altona in the hollow of his hand.  Brannan had made no money.  Not he, nor ever will.  But Brannan could do much what he pleased in this world, without money.  For whenever Brannan studied the rights and the wrongs of any enterprise, all men knew that what Brannan decided about it was well-nigh the eternal truth; and therefore all men of sense were accustomed to place great confidence in his prophecies. But, more than this, and better, Brannan was an unconscious dog, who believed in the people.  So, when he knew what was the right and what was the wrong, he could stand up before two or three thousand people and tell them what was right and what was wrong, and tell them with the same simplicity and freshness with which he would talk to little Horace on his knee.  Of the thousands who heard him there would not be one in a hundred who knew that this was eloquence.  They were fain to say, as they sat in their shops, talking, that Brannan was not eloquent.  Nay, they went so far as to regret that Brannan was not eloquent!  If he were only as eloquent as Carker was or as Barker was, how excellent he would be!  But when, a month after, it was necessary for them to do anything about the thing he had been speaking of, they did what Brannan had told them to do; forgetting, most likely, that he had ever told them, and fancying that these were their own ideas, which, in fact, had, from his liquid, ponderous, transparent, and invisible common sense, distilled unconsciously into their being.  I wonder whether Brannan ever knew that he was eloquent.  What I knew, and what dear George knew, was, that he was one of the leaders of men!  Courage, my friends, we are steadily advancing to the Brick Moon!  For George had stopped, and seen Brannan; and Brannan had not forgotten.  Seventeen years Brannan had remembered, and not a ship had been lost on a lee-shore because her longitude was wrong,--not a baby had wailed its last as it was ground between wrecked spar and cruel rock,--not a swollen corpse unknown had been flung up upon the sand and been buried with a nameless epitaph,-- but Brannan had recollected the Brick Moon, and had, in the memory-chamber which rejected nothing, stored away the story of the horror.  And now George was ready to consecrate a round hundred thousand to the building of the Moon; and Brannan was ready, in the thousand ways in which wise men move the people to and fro, to persuade them to give to us a hundred thousand more; and George had come to ask me if I were not ready to undertake with them the final great effort, of which our old calculations were the embryo.  For this I was now to contribute the mathematical certainty and the lore borrowed from naval science, which should blossom and bear fruit when the Brick Moon was snapped like a cherry from the ways on which it was built, was launched into the air by power gathered from a thousand freshets, and, poised at last in its own pre-calculated region of the ether, should begin its course of eternal blessings in one unchanging meridian!  Vision of Beneficence and Wonder!  Of course I consented.  Oh that you were not so eager for the end!  Oh that I might tell you, what now you will never know,--of the great campaign which we then and there inaugurated!  How the horrible loss of the Royal Martyr, whose longitude was three degrees awry, startled the whole world, and gave us a point to start from.  How I explained to George that he must not subscribe the one hundred thousand dollars in a moment.  It must come in bits, when "the cause" needed a  stimulus, or the public needed encouragement.  How we caught neophyte editors, and explained to them enough to make them think the Moon was well-nigh their own invention and their own thunder. How, beginning in Boston, we sent round to all the men of science, all those of philanthropy, and all those of commerce, three thousand circulars, inviting them to a private meeting at George's parlors at the Revere.  How, besides ourselves, and some nice, respectable-looking old gentlemen Brannan had brought over from Podunk with him, paying their fares both ways, there were present only three men,--all adventurers whose projects had failed,-- besides the representatives of the press.  How, of these representatives, some understood the whole, and some understood nothing.  How, the next day, all gave us "first-rate notices."  How, a few days after, in the lower Horticultural Hall, we had our first public meeting.  How Haliburton brought us fifty people who loved him,--his Bible class, most of them,--to help fill up; how, besides these, there were not three persons whom we had not asked personally, or one who could invent an excuse to stay away.  How we had hung the walls with intelligible and unintelligible diagrams.  How I opened the meeting.  Of that meeting, indeed, I must tell something.  First, I spoke.  I did not pretend to unfold the scheme.  I did not attempt any rhetoric.  But I did not make any apologies.  I told them simply of the dangers of lee-shores.  I told them when they were most dangerous,-- when seamen came upon them unawares.  I explained to them that, though the costly chronometer, frequently adjusted, made a delusive guide to the voyager who often made a harbor, still the adjustment was treacherous, the instrument beyond the use of the poor, and that, once astray, its error increased forever.  I said that we believed we had a method which, if the means were supplied for the experiment, would give the humblest fisherman the very certainty of sunrise and of sunset in his calculations of his place upon the world.  And I said that whenever a man knew his place in this world, it was always likely all would go well.  Then I sat down.  Then dear George spoke,--simply, but very briefly. He said he was a stranger to the Boston people, and that those who knew him at all knew he was not a talking man. He was a civil engineer, and his business was to calculate and to build, and not to talk.  But he had come here to say that he had studied this new plan for the longitude from the Top to the Bottom, and that he believed in it through and through.  There was his opinion, if that was worth anything to anybody.  If that meeting resolved to go forward with the enterprise, or if anybody proposed to, he should offer his services in any capacity, and without any pay, for its success.  If he might only work as a bricklayer, he would work as a bricklayer.  For he believed, on his soul, that the success of this enterprise promised more for mankind than any enterprise which was ever likely to call for the devotion of his life.  "And to the good of mankind," he said, very simply, "my life is devoted."  Then he sat down.  Then Brannan got up.  Up to this time, excepting that George had dropped this hint about bricklaying, nobody had said a word about the Moon, far less hinted what it was to be made of.  So Ben had the whole to open.  He did it as if he had been talking to a bright boy of ten years old.  He made those people think that he respected them as his equals.  But, in fact, he chose every word, as if not one of them knew anything.  He explained, as if it were rather more simple to explain than to take for granted.  But he explained as if, were they talking, they might be explaining to him.  He led them from point to point,--oh! so much more clearly than I have been leading you,--till, as their mouths dropped a little open in their eager interest, and their lids forgot to wink in their gaze upon his face, and so their eyebrows seemed a little lifted in curiosity,--till, I say, each man felt as if he were himself the inventor, who had bridged difficulty after difficulty; as if, indeed, the whole were too simple to be called difficult or complicated. The only wonder was that the Board of Longitude, or the Emperor Napoleon, or the Smithsonian, or somebody, had not sent this little planet on its voyage of blessing long before.  Not a syllable that you would have called rhetoric, not a word that you would have thought prepared; and then Brannan sat down.  That was Ben Brannan's way.  For my part, I like it better than eloquence.  Then I got up again.  We would answer any questions, I said.  We represented people who were eager to go forward with this work. (Alas! except Q., all of those represented were on the stage.)  We could not go forward without the general assistance of the community.  It was not an enterprise which the government could be asked to favor.  It was not an enterprise which would yield one penny of profit to any human being.  We had therefore, purely on the ground of its benefit to mankind, brought it before an assembly of Boston men and women.  Then there was a pause, and we could hear our watches tick, and our hearts beat.  Dear George asked me in a whisper if he should say anything more, but I thought not.  The pause became painful, and then Tom Coram, prince of merchants, rose.  Had any calculation been made of the probable cost of the experiment of one moon?  I said the calculations were on the table.  The brick alone would cost $60,000.  Mr. Orcutt had computed that $214,729 would complete two flywheels and one moon.  This made no allowance for whitewashing the moon, which was not strictly necessary.  The fly-wheels and water-power would be equally valuable for the succeeding moons, it any were attempted, and therefore the second moon could be turned off, it was hoped, for $159,732.  Thomas Coram had been standing all the time I spoke, and in an instant he said:  "I am no mathematician.  But I have had a ship ground to pieces under me on the Laccadives because our chronometer was wrong.  You need $250,000 to build your first moon.  I will be one of twenty men to furnish the money; or I will pay  $10,000 to-morrow for this purpose, to any person who may be named as treasurer, to be repaid to me if the moon is not finished this day twenty years."  That was as long a speech as Tom Coram ever made. But it was pointed.  The small audience tapped applause.  Orcutt looked at me, and I nodded.  "I will be another, of the twenty men," cried he.  "And I another," said an old bluff Englishman, whom nobody had invited; who proved to be a Mr. Robert Boll, a Sheffield man, who came in from curiosity.  He stopped after the meeting; said he should leave the country the next week, and I have never seen him since.  But his bill of exchange came all the same.  That was all the public subscribing.  Enough more than we had hoped for.  We tried to make Coram treasurer, but he refused.  We had to make Haliburton treasurer, though we should have liked a man better known than he then was.  Then we adjourned.  Some nice ladies then came up, and gave, one a dollar, and one five dollars, and one fifty, and so on,--and some men who have stuck by ever since.  I always, in my own mind, call each of those women Damaris, and each of those men Dionysius.  But those are not their real names.  How I am wasting time on an old story!  Then some of these ladies came the next day and proposed a fair; and out of that, six months after, grew the great Longitude Fair, that you will all remember, if you went to it, I am sure.  And the papers the next day gave us first-rate reports; and then, two by two, with our subscription- books, we went at it.  But I must not tell the details of that subscription.  There were two or three men who subscribed $5,000 each, because they were perfectly certain the amount would never be raised.  They wanted, for once, to get the credit of liberality for nothing. There were many men and many women who subscribed from one dollar up to one thousand, not because they cared a straw for the longitude, nor because they believed in the least in the project; but because they believed in Brannan, in Orcutt, in Q., or in me.  Love goes far in this world of ours.  Some few men subscribed because others had done it: it was the thing to do, and they must not be out of fashion.  And three or four, at least, subscribed because each hour of their lives there came up the memory of the day when the news came that the---- was lost, George, or Harry, or John, in the----, and they knew that George, or Harry, or John might have been at home, had it been easier than it is to read the courses of the stars!  Fair, subscriptions, and Orcutt's reserve,--we counted up $162,000, or nearly so.  There would be a little more when all was paid in.  But we could not use a cent, except Orcutt's and our own little subscriptions, till we had got the whole.  And at this point it seemed as if the whole world was sick of us, and that we had gathered every penny that was in store for us.  The orange was squeezed dry!    II  HOW WE BUILT IT  The orange was squeezed dry!  And how little any of us knew,--skilful George Orcutt, thoughtful Ben Brannan, loyal Haliburton, ingenious Q., or poor painstaking I,--how little we knew, or any of us, where was another orange, or how we could mix malic acid and tartaric acid, and citric acid and auric acid and sugar and water so as to imitate orange-juice, and fill up the bank-account enough to draw in the conditioned subscriptions, and so begin to build the MOON.  How often, as I lay awake at night, have I added up the different subscriptions in some new order, as if that would help the matter: and how steadily they have come out one hundred and sixty-two thousand dollars, or even less, when I must needs, in my sleepiness, forget somebody's name!  So Haliburton put into railroad stocks all the money he collected, and the rest of us ground on at our mills, or flew up on our own wings towards Heaven.  Thus Orcutt built more tunnels, Q. prepared for more commencements, Haliburton calculated more policies, Ben Brannan created more civilization, and I, as I could, healed the hurt of my people of Naguadavick for the months there were left to me of my stay in that thriving town.  None of us had the wit to see how the problem was to be wrought out further.  No.  The best things come to us when we have faithfully and well made all the preparation and done our best; but they come in some way that is none of ours.  So was it now, that to build the BRICK MOON it was necessary that I should be turned out of Naguadavick ignominiously, and that Jeff. Davis and some seven or eight other bad men should create the Great Rebellion.  Hear how it happened.  Dennis Shea, my Double,--otherwise, indeed, called by my name and legally so,--undid me, as my friends supposed, one evening at a public meeting called by poor Isaacs in Naguadavick.  Of that transaction I have no occasion here to tell the story.  But of that transaction one consequence is that the BRICK MOON now moves in ether.  I stop writing, to rest my eye upon it, through a little telescope of Alvan Clark's here, which is always trained near it.  It is moving on as placidly as ever.  It came about thus.  The morning after poor Dennis, whom I have long since forgiven, made his extraordinary speeches, without any authority from me, in the Town Hall at Naguadavick, I thought, and my wife agreed with me, that we had better both leave town with the children. Auchmuty, our dear friend, thought so too.  We left in the seven o'clock Accommodation for Skowhegan, and so came to Township No. 9 in the 3d Range, and there for years we resided.  That whole range of townships was set off under a provision admirable in its character, that the first settled minister in each town should receive one hundred acres of land as the "minister's grant," and the first settled schoolmaster eighty.  To No. 9, therefore, I came.  I constituted a little Sandemanian church.  Auchmuty and Delafield came up and installed me, and with these hands I built the cabin in which, with Polly and the little ones, I have since spent many happy nights and days.  This is not the place for me to publish a map, which I have by me, of No. 9, nor an account of its many advantages for settlers.  Should I ever print my papers called "Stay-at-home Robinsons," it will be easy with them to explain its topography and geography. Suffice it now to say, that, with Alice and Bertha and Polly, I took tramps up and down through the lumbermen's roads, and soon knew the general features of the lay of the land.  Nor was it long, of course, before we came out one day upon the curious land-slides, which have more than once averted the flow of the Little Carrotook River, where it has washed the rocks away so far as to let down one section more of the overlying yielding yellow clay.  Think how my eyes flashed, and my wife's, as, struggling though a wilderness of moosewood, we came out one afternoon on this front of yellow clay!  Yellow clay of course, when properly treated by fire, is brick!  Here we were surrounded by forests, only waiting to be burned; yonder was clay, only waiting to be baked.  Polly looked at me, and I looked at her, and with one voice, we cried out, "The MOON!"  For here was this shouting river at our feet, whose power had been running to waste since the day when the Laurentian hills first heaved themselves above the hot Atlantic; and that day, I am informed by Mr. Agassiz, was the first day in the history of this solid world.  Here was water-power enough for forty fly-wheels, were it necessary to send heavenward twenty moons.  Here was solid timber enough for a hundred dams, yet only one was necessary to give motion to the fly-wheels.  Here was retirement,--freedom from criticism, an escape from the journalists, who would not embarrass us by telling of every cracked brick which had to be rejected from the structure.  We had lived in No. 9 now for six weeks, and not an "own correspondent" of them all had yet told what Rev. Mr. Ingham had for dinner.  Of course I wrote to George Orcutt at once of our great discovery, and he came up at once to examine the situation.  On the whole, it pleased him.  He could not take the site I proposed for the dam, because this very clay there made the channel treacherous, and there was danger that the stream would work out a new career.  But lower down we found a stony gorge with which George was satisfied; he traced out a line for a railway by which, of their own weight, the brick-cars could run to the centrings; he showed us where, with some excavations, the fly-wheels could be placed exactly above the great mill- wheels, that no power might be wasted, and explained to us how, when the gigantic structure was finished, the BRICK MOON would gently roll down its ways upon the rapid wheels, to be launched instant into the sky!  Shall I ever forget that happy October day of anticipation?  We spent many of those October days in tentative surveys.  Alice and Bertha were our chain-men, intelligent and obedient.  I drove for George his stakes, or I cut away his brush, or I raised and lowered the shield at which he sighted  and at noon Polly appeared with her baskets, and we would dine al fresco, on a pretty point which, not many months after, was wholly covered by the eastern end of the dam.  When the field- work was finished we retired to the cabin for days, and calculated and drew, and drew and calculated.  Estimates for feeding Irishmen, estimates of hay for mules,--George was sure he could work mules better than oxen,--estimates for cement, estimates for the preliminary saw-mills, estimates for rail for the little brick-road, for wheels, for spikes, and for cutting ties; what did we not estimate for--on a basis almost wholly new, you will observe.  For here the brick would cost us less than our old conceptions,--our water-power cost us almost nothing,--but our stores and our wages would cost us much more.  These estimates are now to me very curious,--a monument, indeed, to dear George's memory, that in the result they proved so accurate.  I would gladly print them here at length, with some illustrative cuts, but that I know the impatience of the public, and its indifference to detail.  If we are ever able to print a proper memorial of George, that, perhaps, will be the fitter place for them.  Suffice it to say that with the subtractions thus made from the original estimates,--even with the additions forced upon us by working in a wilderness,--George was satisfied that a money charge of $197,327 would build and start THE MOON.  As soon as we had determined the site, we marked off eighty acres, which contained all the essential localities, up and down the little Carrotook River,--I engaged George for the first schoolmaster in No. 9, and he took these eighty acres for the schoolmaster's reservation.  Alice and Bertha went to school to him the next day, taking lessons in civil engineering; and I wrote to the Bingham trustees to notify them that I had engaged a teacher, and that he had selected his land.  Of course we remembered, still, that we were near forty thousand dollars short of the new estimates, and also that much of our money would not be paid us but on condition that two hundred and fifty thousand were raised.  But George said that his own subscription was wholly unhampered: with that we would go to work on the preliminary work of the dam, and on the flies.  Then, if the flies would hold together,--and they should hold if mortise and iron could hold them,--they might be at work summers and winters, days and nights, storing up Power for us.  This would encourage the subscribers, it would encourage us; and all this preliminary work wo