There are two editions of this ebook in the Project Gutenberg collection. Various characteristics of each ebook are listed to aid in selecting the preferred file.  Click on any of the filenumbers below to quickly view each ebook.  27     1874, First Edition; illustrated.  107    1895, Second Edition, extensively revised by Thomas Hardy.  [Illustration]     Far from the Madding Crowd  by Thomas Hardy   Contents   PREFACE  Chapter I. Description of Farmer Oak—An Incident  Chapter II. Night—The Flock—An Interior—Another Interior  Chapter III. A Girl on Horseback—Conversation  Chapter IV. Gabriel’s Resolve—The Visit—The Mistake  Chapter V. Departure of Bathsheba—A Pastoral Tragedy  Chapter VI. The Fair—The Journey—The Fire  Chapter VII. Recognition—A Timid Girl  Chapter VIII. The Malthouse—The Chat—News  Chapter IX. The Homestead—A Visitor—Half-Confidences  Chapter X. Mistress and Men  Chapter XI. Outside the Barracks—Snow—A Meeting  Chapter XII. Farmers—A Rule—An Exception  Chapter XIII. Sortes Sanctorum—The Valentine  Chapter XIV. Effect of the Letter—Sunrise  Chapter XV. A Morning Meeting—The Letter Again  Chapter XVI. All Saints’ and All Souls’  Chapter XVII. In the Market-Place  Chapter XVIII. Boldwood in Meditation—Regret  Chapter XIX. The Sheep-Washing—The Offer  Chapter XX. Perplexity—Grinding the Shears—A Quarrel  Chapter XXI. Troubles in the Fold—A Message  Chapter XXII. The Great Barn and the Sheep-Shearers  Chapter XXIII. Eventide—A Second Declaration  Chapter XXIV. The Same Night—The Fir Plantation  Chapter XXV. The New Acquaintance Described  Chapter XXVI. Scene on the Verge of the Hay-Mead  Chapter XXVII. Hiving the Bees  Chapter XXVIII. The Hollow Amid the Ferns  Chapter XXIX. Particulars of a Twilight Walk  Chapter XXX. Hot Cheeks and Tearful Eyes  Chapter XXXI. Blame—Fury  Chapter XXXII. Night—Horses Tramping  Chapter XXXIII. In the Sun—A Harbinger  Chapter XXXIV. Home Again—A Trickster  Chapter XXXV. At an Upper Window  Chapter XXXVI. Wealth in Jeopardy—The Revel  Chapter XXXVII. The Storm—The Two Together  Chapter XXXVIII. Rain—One Solitary Meets Another  Chapter XXXIX. Coming Home—A Cry  Chapter XL. On Casterbridge Highway  Chapter XLI. Suspicion—Fanny Is Sent For  Chapter XLII. Joseph and His Burden—Buck’s Head  Chapter XLIII. Fanny’s Revenge  Chapter XLIV. Under a Tree—Reaction  Chapter XLV. Troy’s Romanticism  Chapter XLVI. The Gurgoyle: Its Doings  Chapter XLVII. Adventures by the Shore  Chapter XLVIII. Doubts Arise—Doubts Linger  Chapter XLIX. Oak’s Advancement—A Great Hope  Chapter L. The Sheep Fair—Troy Touches His Wife’s Hand  Chapter LI. Bathsheba Talks with Her Outrider  Chapter LII. Converging Courses  Chapter LIII. Concurritur—Horæ Momento  Chapter LIV. After the Shock  Chapter LV. The March Following—“Bathsheba Boldwood”  Chapter LVI. Beauty in Loneliness—After All  Chapter LVII. A Foggy Night and Morning—Conclusion   Notes     PREFACE   In reprinting this story for a new edition I am reminded that it was in the chapters of “Far from the Madding Crowd,” as they appeared month by month in a popular magazine, that I first ventured to adopt the word “Wessex” from the pages of early English history, and give it a fictitious significance as the existing name of the district once included in that extinct kingdom. The series of novels I projected being mainly of the kind called local, they seemed to require a territorial definition of some sort to lend unity to their scene. Finding that the area of a single county did not afford a canvas large enough for this purpose, and that there were objections to an invented name, I disinterred the old one. The press and the public were kind enough to welcome the fanciful plan, and willingly joined me in the anachronism of imagining a Wessex population living under Queen Victoria;—a modern Wessex of railways, the penny post, mowing and reaping machines, union workhouses, lucifer matches, labourers who could read and write, and National school children. But I believe I am correct in stating that, until the existence of this contemporaneous Wessex was announced in the present story, in 1874, it had never been heard of, and that the expression, “a Wessex peasant,” or “a Wessex custom,” would theretofore have been taken to refer to nothing later in date than the Norman Conquest.  I did not anticipate that this application of the word to a modern use would extend outside the chapters of my own chronicles. But the name was soon taken up elsewhere as a local designation. The first to do so was the now defunct _Examiner_, which, in the impression bearing date July 15, 1876, entitled one of its articles “The Wessex Labourer,” the article turning out to be no dissertation on farming during the Heptarchy, but on the modern peasant of the south-west counties, and his presentation in these stories.  Since then the appellation which I had thought to reserve to the horizons and landscapes of a merely realistic dream-country, has become more and more popular as a practical definition; and the dream-country has, by degrees, solidified into a utilitarian region which people can go to, take a house in, and write to the papers from. But I ask all good and gentle readers to be so kind as to forget this, and to refuse steadfastly to believe that there are any inhabitants of a Victorian Wessex outside the pages of this and the companion volumes in which they were first discovered.  Moreover, the village called Weatherbury, wherein the scenes of the present story of the series are for the most part laid, would perhaps be hardly discernible by the explorer, without help, in any existing place nowadays; though at the time, comparatively recent, at which the tale was written, a sufficient reality to meet the descriptions, both of backgrounds and personages, might have been traced easily enough. The church remains, by great good fortune, unrestored and intact, and a few of the old houses; but the ancient malt-house, which was formerly so characteristic of the parish, has been pulled down these twenty years; also most of the thatched and dormered cottages that were once lifeholds. The game of prisoner’s base, which not so long ago seemed to enjoy a perennial vitality in front of the worn-out stocks, may, so far as I can say, be entirely unknown to the rising generation of schoolboys there. The practice of divination by Bible and key, the regarding of valentines as things of serious import, the shearing-supper, and the harvest-home, have, too, nearly disappeared in the wake of the old houses; and with them have gone, it is said, much of that love of fuddling to which the village at one time was notoriously prone. The change at the root of this has been the recent supplanting of the class of stationary cottagers, who carried on the local traditions and humours, by a population of more or less migratory labourers, which has led to a break of continuity in local history, more fatal than any other thing to the preservation of legend, folk-lore, close inter-social relations, and eccentric individualities. For these the indispensable conditions of existence are attachment to the soil of one particular spot by generation after generation.  T. H.  February 1895     CHAPTER I Description of Farmer Oak—An Incident   When Farmer Oak smiled, the corners of his mouth spread till they were within an unimportant distance of his ears, his eyes were reduced to chinks, and diverging wrinkles appeared round them, extending upon his countenance like the rays in a rudimentary sketch of the rising sun.  His Christian name was Gabriel, and on working days he was a young man of sound judgment, easy motions, proper dress, and general good character. On Sundays he was a man of misty views, rather given to postponing, and hampered by his best clothes and umbrella: upon the whole, one who felt himself to occupy morally that vast middle space of Laodicean neutrality which lay between the Communion people of the parish and the drunken section,—that is, he went to church, but yawned privately by the time the congregation reached the Nicene creed, and thought of what there would be for dinner when he meant to be listening to the sermon. Or, to state his character as it stood in the scale of public opinion, when his friends and critics were in tantrums, he was considered rather a bad man; when they were pleased, he was rather a good man; when they were neither, he was a man whose moral colour was a kind of pepper-and-salt mixture.  Since he lived six times as many working-days as Sundays, Oak’s appearance in his old clothes was most peculiarly his own—the mental picture formed by his neighbours in imagining him being always dressed in that way. He wore a low-crowned felt hat, spread out at the base by tight jamming upon the head for security in high winds, and a coat like Dr. Johnson’s; his lower extremities being encased in ordinary leather leggings and boots emphatically large, affording to each foot a roomy apartment so constructed that any wearer might stand in a river all day long and know nothing of damp—their maker being a conscientious man who endeavoured to compensate for any weakness in his cut by unstinted dimension and solidity.  Mr. Oak carried about him, by way of watch, what may be called a small silver clock; in other words, it was a watch as to shape and intention, and a small clock as to size. This instrument being several years older than Oak’s grandfather, had the peculiarity of going either too fast or not at all. The smaller of its hands, too, occasionally slipped round on the pivot, and thus, though the minutes were told with precision, nobody could be quite certain of the hour they belonged to. The stopping peculiarity of his watch Oak remedied by thumps and shakes, and he escaped any evil consequences from the other two defects by constant comparisons with and observations of the sun and stars, and by pressing his face close to the glass of his neighbours’ windows, till he could discer