[Illustration]     The Fables of Aesop  SELECTED, TOLD ANEW AND THEIR HISTORY TRACED  By JOSEPH JACOBS  DONE INTO PICTURES BY RICHARD HEIGHWAY  LONDON MACMILLAN & CO. & NEW YORK 1894 _All rights reserved_     To PROF. F.J. CHILD OF HARVARD     Contents   PREFACE  A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ÆSOPIC FABLE  The Cock and the Pearl  The Wolf and the Lamb  The Dog and the Shadow  The Lion’s Share  The Wolf and the Crane  The Man and the Serpent  The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse  The Fox and the Crow  The Sick Lion  The Ass and the Lapdog  The Lion and the Mouse  The Swallow and the Other Birds  The Frogs Desiring a King  The Mountains in Labour  The Hares and the Frogs  The Wolf and the Kid  The Woodman and the Serpent  The Bald Man and the Fly  The Fox and the Stork  The Fox and the Mask  The Jay and the Peacock  The Frog and the Ox  Androcles  The Bat, the Birds, and the Beasts  The Hart and the Hunter  The Serpent and the File  The Man and the Wood  The Dog and the Wolf  The Belly and the Members  The Hart in the Ox-Stall  The Fox and the Grapes  The Horse, Hunter, and Stag  The Peacock and Juno  The Fox and the Lion  The Lion and the Statue  The Ant and the Grasshopper  The Tree and the Reed  The Fox and the Cat  The Wolf in Sheep’s Clothing  The Dog in the Manger  The Man and the Wooden God  The Fisher  The Shepherd’s Boy  The Young Thief and His Mother  The Man and His Two Wives  The Nurse and the Wolf  The Tortoise and the Birds  The Two Crabs  The Ass in the Lion’s Skin  The Two Fellows and the Bear  The Two Pots  The Four Oxen and the Lion  The Fisher and the Little Fish  Avaricious and Envious  The Crow and the Pitcher  The Man and the Satyr  The Goose With the Golden Eggs  The Labourer and the Nightingale  The Fox, the Cock, and the Dog  The Wind and the Sun  Hercules and the Waggoner  The Man, the Boy, and the Donkey  The Miser and His Gold  The Fox and the Mosquitoes  The Fox Without a Tail  The One-Eyed Doe  Belling the Cat  The Hare and the Tortoise  The Old Man and Death  The Hare With Many Friends  The Lion in Love  The Bundle of Sticks  The Lion, the Fox, and the Beasts  The Ass’s Brains  The Eagle and the Arrow  The Milkmaid and Her Pail  The Cat-Maiden  The Horse and the Ass  The Trumpeter Taken Prisoner  The Buffoon and the Countryman  The Old Woman and the Wine-Jar  The Fox and the Goat     PREFACE   It is difficult to say what are and what are not the Fables of Æsop. Almost all the fables that have appeared in the Western world have been sheltered at one time or another under the shadow of that name. I could at any rate enumerate at least seven hundred which have appeared in English in various books entitled _Æsop’s Fables_. L’Estrange’s collection alone contains over five hundred. In the struggle for existence among all these a certain number stand out as being the most effective and the most familiar. I have attempted to bring most of these into the following pages.  There is no fixed text even for the nucleus collection contained in this book. Æsop himself is so shadowy a figure that we might almost be forgiven if we held, with regard to him, the heresy of Mistress Elizabeth Prig. What we call his fables can in most cases be traced back to the fables of other people, notably of Phædrus and Babrius. It is usual to regard the Greek Prose Collections, passing under the name of Æsop, as having greater claims to the eponymous title; but modern research has shown that these are but medieval prosings of Babrius’s verse. I have therefore felt at liberty to retell the fables in such a way as would interest children, and have adopted from the various versions that which seemed most suitable in each case, telling the fable anew in my own way.  Much has been learnt during the present century about the history of the various apologues that walk abroad under the name of “Æsop.” I have attempted to bring these various lines of research together in the somewhat elaborate introductory volume which I wrote to accompany my edition of Caxton’s _Æsop_, published by Mr. Nutt in his _Bibliothèque de Carabas_. I have placed in front of the present version of the “Fables,” by kind permission of Mr. Nutt, the short abstract of my researches in which I there summed up the results of that volume. I must accompany it, here as there, by a warning to the reader, that for a large proportion of the results thus reached I am myself responsible; but I am happy to say that many of them have been accepted by the experts in America, France, and Germany, who have done me the honour to consider my researches. Here, in England, there does not seem to be much interest in this class of work, and English scholars, for the most part, are content to remain in ignorance of the methods and results of literary history.  I have attached to the “Fables” in the obscurity of small print at the end a series of notes, summing up what is known as to the _provenance_ of each fable. Here, again, I have tried to put in shorter and more readable form the results of my researches in the volume to which I have already referred. For more detailed information I must refer to the forty closely-printed pages (vol. i. pp. 225-268) which contain the bibliography of the Fables.  JOSEPH JACOBS.     A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ÆSOPIC FABLE   Most nations develop the Beast-Tale as part of their folk-lore, some go further and apply it to satiric purposes, and a few nations afford isolated examples of the shaping of the Beast-Tale to teach some moral truth by means of the Fable properly so called.[1] But only two peoples independently made this a general practice. Both in Greece[2] and in India we find in the earliest literature such casual and frequent mention of Fables as seems to imply a body of Folk-Fables current among the people. And in both countries special circumstances raised the Fable from folklore into literature. In Greece, during the epoch of the Tyrants, when free speech was dangerous, the Fable was largely used for political purposes. The inventor of this application or the most prominent user of it was one Æsop, a slave at Samos whose name has ever since been connected with the Fable. All that we know about him is contained in a few lines of Herodotus: that he flourished 550 B.C.; was killed in accordance with a Delphian oracle; and that _wergild_ was claimed for him by the grandson of his master, Iadmon. When free speech was established in the Greek democracies, the custom of using Fables in harangues was continued and encouraged by the rhetoricians, while the mirth-producing qualities of the Fable caused it to be regarded as fit subject of after-dinner conversation along with other jests of a broader kind (“Milesian,” “Sybaritic”). This habit of regarding the Fable as a form of the Jest intensified the tendency to connect it with a well-known name as in the case of our Joe Miller. About 300 B.C. Demetrius Phalereus, whilom tyrant of Athens and founder of the Alexandria Library, collected together all the Fables he could find under the title of _Assemblies of Æsopic Tales_ (Λόγων Αἰσωπείων συναγωγαι). This collection, running probably to some 200 Fables, after being interpolated and edited by the Alexandrine grammarians, was turned into neat Latin iambics by Phædrus, a Greek freedman of Augustus in the early years of the Christian era. As the modern Æsop is mainly derived from Phædrus, the answer to the question “Who wrote Æsop?” is simple : “Demetrius of Phaleron.”[3]   [1] _E.g._ Jotham’s Fable, Judges ix., and that of Menenius Agrippa in  Livy, seem to be quite independent of either Greek or Indian  influence. But one fable does not make Fable.    [2] Only about twenty fables, however, are known in Greece before  Phædrus, 30 A.D. See my Caxton’s _Æsop_ vol. i. pp. 26–29, for a  complete enumeration.    [3] For this statement and what follows a reference to the Pedigree of  the Fables on p. 196 will be found useful.   In India the great ethical reformer, Sakyamuni, the Buddha, initiated (or adopted from the Brahmins) the habit of using the Beast-Tale for moral purposes, or, in other words, transformed it into the Fable proper. A collection of these seems to have existed previously and independently, in which the Fables were associated with the name of a mythical sage, Kasyâpa. These were appropriated by the early Buddhists by the simple expedient of making Kasyâpa the immediately preceding incarnation of the Buddha. A number of his _itihâsas_ or Tales were included in the sacred Buddhistic work containing the _Jātakas_ or previous-births of the Buddha, in some of which the Bodisat (or future Buddha) appears as one of the Dramatis Personæ of the Fables; the Crane, _e.g._, in our _Wolf and Crane_ being one of the incarnations of the Buddha. So, too, the Lamb of our _Wolf and Lamb_ was once Buddha; it was therefore easy for him—so the Buddhists thought—to remember and tell these Fables as incidents of his former careers. It is obvious that the whole idea of a Fable as an anecdote about a man masquerading in the form of a beast could most easily arise and gain currency where the theory of transmigration was vividly credited.  The Fables of Kasyâpa, or rather the moral verses (_gathas_) which served as a _memoria technica_ to them, were probably carried over to Ceylon in 241 B.C. along with the Jātakas. About 300 years later (say 50 A.D.) some 100 of these were brought by a Cingalese embassy to Alexandria, where they were translated under the title of “Libyan Fables” (Λόγοι Λυβικοί), which had been earlier applied to similar stories that had percolated to Hellas from India; they were attributed to “Kybises.” This collection seems to have introduced the habit of summing up the teaching of a Fable in the Moral, corresponding to the _gatha_ of the Jātakas. About the end of the first century A.D. the Libyan Fables of “Kybises” became known to the Rabbinic school at Jabne, founded by R. Jochanan ben Saccai, and a number of the Fables translated into Aramaic 