Notes:  1. Legends: = Sidenotes [Bible reference] = Bible references  2. Sections are numbered for future reference. These sections have been chosen arbitrarily, i.e., {1}, {2}  3. This is 'Part 1', but is a complete work in itself. Bunyan wrote a sequel ('Part 2') some years after the first part, hence the 'Parts'.     THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS  From This World To That Which Is To Come   by  John Bunyan     Part One  DELIVERED UNDER THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM BY JOHN BUNYAN   The Author's Apology for his Book   {1} When at the first I took my pen in hand   Thus for to write, I did not understand   That I at all should make a little book   In such a mode; nay, I had undertook   To make another; which, when almost done,   Before I was aware, I this begun.    And thus it was: I, writing of the way   And race of saints, in this our gospel day,   Fell suddenly into an allegory   About their journey, and the way to glory,   In more than twenty things which I set down.   This done, I twenty more had in my crown;   And they again began to multiply,   Like sparks that from the coals of fire do fly.    Nay, then, thought I, if that you breed so fast,   I'll put you by yourselves, lest you at last   Should prove ad infinitum, and eat out   The book that I already am about.    Well, so I did; but yet I did not think   To shew to all the world my pen and ink   In such a mode; I only thought to make   I knew not what; nor did I undertake   Thereby to please my neighbour: no, not I;   I did it my own self to gratify.  {2} Neither did I but vacant seasons spend   In this my scribble; nor did I intend   But to divert myself in doing this   From worser thoughts which make me do amiss.    Thus, I set pen to paper with delight,   And quickly had my thoughts in black and white.   For, having now my method by the end,   Still as I pulled, it came; and so I penned   It down: until it came at last to be,   For length and breadth, the bigness which you see.    Well, when I had thus put mine ends together,   I shewed them others, that I might see whether   They would condemn them, or them justify:   And some said, Let them live; some, Let them die;   Some said, JOHN, print it; others said, Not so;   Some said, It might do good; others said, No.    Now was I in a strait, and did not see   Which was the best thing to be done by me:   At last I thought, Since you are thus divided,   I print it will, and so the case decided.  {3} For, thought I, some, I see, would have it done,   Though others in that channel do not run:   To prove, then, who advised for the best,   Thus I thought fit to put it to the test.    I further thought, if now I did deny   Those that would have it, thus to gratify.   I did not know but hinder them I might   Of that which would to them be great delight.    For those which were not for its coming forth,   I said to them, Offend you I am loth,   Yet, since your brethren pleased with it be,   Forbear to judge till you do further see.    If that thou wilt not read, let it alone;   Some love the meat, some love to pick the bone.   Yea, that I might them better palliate,   I did too with them thus expostulate:--  {4} May I not write in such a style as this?   In such a method, too, and yet not miss   My end--thy good? Why may it not be done?   Dark clouds bring waters, when the bright bring none.   Yea, dark or bright, if they their silver drops   Cause to descend, the earth, by yielding crops,   Gives praise to both, and carpeth not at either,   But treasures up the fruit they yield together;   Yea, so commixes both, that in her fruit   None can distinguish this from that: they suit   Her well when hungry; but, if she be full,   She spews out both, and makes their blessings null.    You see the ways the fisherman doth take   To catch the fish; what engines doth he make?   Behold how he engageth all his wits;   Also his snares, lines, angles, hooks, and nets;   Yet fish there be, that neither hook, nor line,   Nor snare, nor net, nor engine can make thine:   They must be groped for, and be tickled too,   Or they will not be catch'd, whate'er you do.    How does the fowler seek to catch his game   By divers means! all which one cannot name:   His guns, his nets, his lime-twigs, light, and bell:   He creeps, he goes, he stands; yea, who can tell   Of all his postures? Yet there's none of these   Will make him master of what fowls he please.   Yea, he must pipe and whistle to catch this,   Yet, if he does so, that bird he will miss.    If that a pearl may in a toad's head dwell,   And may be found too in an oyster-shell;   If things that promise nothing do contain   What better is than gold; who will disdain,   That have an inkling of it, there to look,   That they may find it? Now, my little book,   (Though void of all these paintings that may make   It with this or the other man to take)   Is not without those things that do excel   What do in brave but empty notions dwell.  {5} 'Well, yet I am not fully satisfied,   That this your book will stand, when soundly tried.'   Why, what's the matter? 'It is dark.' What though?   'But it is feigned.' What of that? I trow?   Some men, by feigned words, as dark as mine,   Make truth to spangle and its rays to shine.    'But they want solidness.' Speak, man, thy mind.   'They drown the weak; metaphors make us blind.'    Solidity, indeed, becomes the pen   Of him that writeth things divine to men;   But must I needs want solidness, because   By metaphors I speak? Were not God's laws,   His gospel laws, in olden times held forth   By types, shadows, and metaphors? Yet loth   Will any sober man be to find fault   With them, lest he be found for to assault   The highest wisdom. No, he rather stoops,   And seeks to find out what by pins and loops,   By calves and sheep, by heifers and by rams,   By birds and herbs, and by the blood of lambs,   God speaketh to him; and happy is he   That finds the light and grace that in them be.  {6} Be not too forward, therefore, to conclude   That I want solidness--that I am rude;   All things solid in show not solid be;   All things in parables despise not we;   Lest things most hurtful lightly we receive,   And things that good are, of our souls bereave.    My dark and cloudy words, they do but hold   The truth, as cabinets enclose the gold.    The prophets used much by metaphors   To set forth truth; yea, who so considers Christ,   his apostles too, shall plainly see,   That truths to this day in such mantles be.    Am I afraid to say, that holy writ,   Which for its style and phrase puts down all wit,   Is everywhere so full of all these things--   Dark figures, allegories? Yet there springs   From that same book that lustre, and those rays   Of light, that turn our darkest nights to days.  {7} Come, let my carper to his life now look,   And find there darker lines than in my book   He findeth any; yea, and let him know,   That in his best things there are worse lines too.    May we but stand before impartial men,   To his poor one I dare adventure ten,   That they will take my meaning in these lines   Far better than his lies in silver shrines.   Come, truth, although in swaddling clouts, I find,   Informs the judgement, rectifies the mind;   Pleases the understanding, makes the will   Submit; the memory too it doth fill   With what doth our imaginations please;   Likewise it tends our troubles to appease.    Sound words, I know, Timothy is to use,   And old wives' fables he is to refuse;   But yet grave Paul him nowhere did forbid   The use of parables; in which lay hid   That gold, those pearls, and precious stones that were   Worth digging for, and that with greatest care.    Let me add one word more. O man of God,   Art thou offended? Dost thou wish I had   Put forth my matter in another dress?   Or, that I had in things been more express?   Three things let me propound; then I submit   To those that are my betters, as is fit.  {8} 1. I find not that I am denied the use   Of this my method, so I no abuse   Put on the words, things, readers; or be rude   In handling figure or similitude,   In application; but, all that I may,   Seek the advance of truth this or that way   Denied, did I say? Nay, I have leave   (Example too, and that from them that have   God better pleased, by their words or ways,   Than any man that breatheth now-a-days)   Thus to express my mind, thus to declare   Things unto thee that excellentest are.    2. I find that men (as high as trees) will write   Dialogue-wise; yet no man doth them slight   For writing so: indeed, if they abuse   Truth, cursed be they, and the craft they use   To that intent; but yet let truth be free   To make her sallies upon thee and me,   Which way it pleases God; for who knows how,   Better than he that taught us first to plough,   To guide our mind and pens for his design?   And he makes base things usher in divine.    3. I find that holy writ in many places   Hath semblance with this method, where the cases   Do call for one thing, to set forth another;   Use it I may, then, and yet nothing smother   Truth's golden beams: nay, by this method may   Make it cast forth its rays as light as day.   And now before I do put up my pen,   I'll shew the profit of my book, and then   Commit both thee and it unto that Hand   That pulls the strong down, and makes weak ones stand.    This book it chalketh out before thine eyes   The man that seeks the everlasting prize;   It shews you whence he comes, whither he goes;   What he leaves undone, also what he does;   It also shows you how he runs and runs,   Till he unto the gate of glory comes.  {9} It shows, too, who set out for life amain,   As if the lasting crown they would obtain;   Here also you may see the reason why   They lose their labour, and like fools do die.    This book will make a traveller of thee,   If by its counsel thou wilt ruled be;   It will direct thee to the Holy Land,   If thou wilt its directions understand:   Yea, it will make the s