A CONNECTICUT YANKEE IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT  by  MARK TWAIN (Samuel L. Clemens)     PREFACE  The ungentle laws and customs touched upon in this tale are historical, and the episodes which are used to illustrate them are also historical.  It is not pretended that these laws and customs existed in England in the sixth century; no, it is only pretended that inasmuch as they existed in the English and other civilizations of far later times, it is safe to consider that it is no libel upon the sixth century to suppose them to have been in practice in that day also.  One is quite justified in inferring that whatever one of these laws or customs was lacking in that remote time, its place was competently filled by a worse one.  The question as to whether there is such a thing as divine right of kings is not settled in this book.  It was found too difficult. That the executive head of a nation should be a person of lofty character and extraordinary ability, was manifest and indisputable; that none but the Deity could select that head unerringly, was also manifest and indisputable; that the Deity ought to make that selection, then, was likewise manifest and indisputable; consequently, that He does make it, as claimed, was an unavoidable deduction. I mean, until the author of this book encountered the Pompadour, and Lady Castlemaine, and some other executive heads of that kind; these were found so difficult to work into the scheme, that it was judged better to take the other tack in this book (which must be issued this fall), and then go into training and settle the question in another book.  It is, of course, a thing which ought to be settled, and I am not going to have anything particular to do next winter anyway.  MARK TWAIN  HARTFORD, July 21, 1889       A CONNECTICUT YANKEE IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT     A WORD OF EXPLANATION  It was in Warwick Castle that I came across the curious stranger whom I am going to talk about.  He attracted me by three things: his candid simplicity, his marvelous familiarity with ancient armor, and the restfulness of his company--for he did all the talking. We fell together, as modest people will, in the tail of the herd that was being shown through, and he at once began to say things which interested me.  As he talked along, softly, pleasantly, flowingly, he seemed to drift away imperceptibly out of this world and time, and into some remote era and old forgotten country; and so he gradually wove such a spell about me that I seemed to move among the specters and shadows and dust and mold of a gray antiquity, holding speech with a relic of it!  Exactly as I would speak of my nearest personal friends or enemies, or my most familiar neighbors, he spoke of Sir Bedivere, Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Launcelot of the Lake, Sir Galahad, and all the other great names of the Table Round--and how old, old, unspeakably old and faded and dry and musty and ancient he came to look as he went on!  Presently he turned to me and said, just as one might speak of the weather, or any other common matter--  “You know about transmigration of souls; do you know about transposition of epochs--and bodies?”  I said I had not heard of it.  He was so little interested--just as when people speak of the weather--that he did not notice whether I made him any answer or not. There was half a moment of silence, immediately interrupted by the droning voice of the salaried cicerone:  “Ancient hauberk, date of the sixth century, time of King Arthur and the Round Table; said to have belonged to the knight Sir Sagramor le Desirous; observe the round hole through the chain-mail in the left breast; can't be accounted for; supposed to have been done with a bullet since invention of firearms--perhaps maliciously by Cromwell's soldiers.”  My acquaintance smiled--not a modern smile, but one that must have gone out of general use many, many centuries ago--and muttered apparently to himself:  “Wit ye well, _I saw it done_.”  Then, after a pause, added: “I did it myself.”  By the time I had recovered from the electric surprise of this remark, he was gone.  All that evening I sat by my fire at the Warwick Arms, steeped in a dream of the olden time, while the rain beat upon the windows, and the wind roared about the eaves and corners.  From time to time I dipped into old Sir Thomas Malory's enchanting book, and fed at its rich feast of prodigies and adventures, breathed in the fragrance of its obsolete names, and dreamed again.  Midnight being come at length, I read another tale, for a nightcap--this which here follows, to wit:  HOW SIR LAUNCELOT SLEW TWO GIANTS, AND MADE A CASTLE FREE     Anon withal came there upon him two great giants, well armed, all save the    heads, with two horrible clubs in their hands.  Sir Launcelot put his shield    afore him, and put the stroke away of the one giant, and with his sword he    clave his head asunder. When his fellow saw that, he ran away as he were    wood [*demented], for fear of the horrible strokes, and Sir Launcelot after    him with all his might, and smote him on the shoulder, and clave him to the    middle.  Then Sir Launcelot went into the hall, and there came afore him    three score ladies and damsels, and all kneeled unto him, and thanked God    and him of their deliverance.  For, sir, said they, the most part of us have    been here this seven year their prisoners, and we have worked all manner of    silk works for our meat, and we are all great gentle-women born, and blessed    be the time, knight, that ever thou wert born; for thou hast done the most    worship that ever did knight in the world, that will we bear record, and we    all pray you to tell us your name, that we may tell our friends who    delivered us out of prison.  Fair damsels, he said, my name is Sir Launcelot    du Lake.  And so he departed from them and betaught them unto God.  And then    he mounted upon his horse, and rode into many strange and wild countries,    and through many waters and valleys, and evil was he lodged.  And at the    last by fortune him happened against a night to come to a fair courtilage,    and therein he found an old gentle-woman that lodged him with a good-will,    and there he had good cheer for him and his horse. And when time was, his    host brought him into a fair garret over the gate to his bed. There Sir    Launcelot unarmed him, and set his harness by him, and went to bed, and anon    he fell on sleep. So, soon after there came one on horseback, and knocked at    the gate in great haste.  And when Sir Launcelot heard this he rose up, and    looked out at the window, and saw by the moonlight three knights come riding    after that one man, and all three lashed on him at once with swords, and    that one knight turned on them knightly again and defended him. Truly, said    Sir Launcelot, yonder one knight shall I help, for it were shame for me to    see three knights on one, and if he be slain I am partner of his death.  And    therewith he took his harness and went out at a window by a sheet down to    the four knights, and then Sir Launcelot said on high, Turn you knights unto    me, and leave your fighting with that knight. And then they all three left    Sir Kay, and turned unto Sir Launcelot, and there began great battle, for    they alight all three, and strake many strokes at Sir Launcelot, and    assailed him on every side. Then Sir Kay dressed him for to have holpen Sir    Launcelot.  Nay, sir, said he, I will none of your help, therefore as ye    will have my help let me alone with them.  Sir Kay for the pleasure of the    knight suffered him for to do his will, and so stood aside. And then anon    within six strokes Sir Launcelot had stricken them to the earth.     And then they all three cried, Sir Knight, we yield us unto you as man of    might matchless.  As to that, said Sir Launcelot, I will not take your    yielding unto me, but so that ye yield you unto Sir Kay the seneschal, on    that covenant I will save your lives and else not.  Fair knight, said they,    that were we loath to do; for as for Sir Kay we chased him hither, and had    overcome him had ye not been; therefore, to yield us unto him it were no    reason.  Well, as to that, said Sir Launcelot, advise you well, for ye may    choose whether ye will die or live, for an ye be yielden, it shall be unto    Sir Kay.  Fair knight, then they said, in saving our lives we will do as    thou commandest us.  Then shall ye, said Sir Launcelot, on Whitsunday next    coming go unto the court of King Arthur, and there shall ye yield you unto    Queen Guenever, and put you all three in her grace and mercy, and say that    Sir Kay sent you thither to be her prisoners.  On the morn Sir Launcelot    arose early, and left Sir Kay sleeping; and Sir Launcelot took Sir Kay's    armor and his shield and armed him, and so he went to the stable and took    his horse, and took his leave of his host, and so he departed.  Then soon    after arose Sir Kay and missed Sir Launcelot; and then he espied that he had    his armor and his horse. Now by my faith I know well that he will grieve    some of the court of King Arthur; for on him knights will be bold, and deem    that it is I, and that will beguile them; and because of his armor and    shield I am sure I shall ride in peace. And then soon after departed Sir    Kay, and thanked his host.   As I laid the book down there was a knock at the door, and my stranger came in.  I gave him a pipe and a chair, and made him welcome.  I also comforted him with a hot Scotch whisky; gave him another one; then still another--hoping always for his story. After a fourth persuader, he drifted into it himself, in a quite simple and natural way:    THE STRANGER'S HISTORY  I am an American.  I was born and reared in Hartford, in the State of Connecticut--anyway, just over the river, in the country.  So I am a Yankee of the Yankees--and practical; yes, and nearly barren of sentiment, I suppose--or poetry, in o