HER PRAIRIE KNIGHT  By B.M. Sinclair, AKA B. M. Bower    CONTENTS       1. Stranded on the Prairie      2. Handsome Cowboy to the Rescue      3. Tilt With Sir Redmond      4. Beatrice Learns a New Language      5. The Search for Dorman      6. Mrs. Lansell's Lecture      7. Beatrice's Wild Ride      8. Dorman Plays Cupid      9. What It Meant to Keith      10. Pine Ridge Range Ablaze      11. Sir Redmond Waits His Answer      12. Held Up by Mr. Kelly      13. Keith's Masterful Wooing      14. Sir Redmond Gets His Answer      HER PRAIRIE KNIGHT    CHAPTER 1. Stranded on the Prairie.   “By George, look behind us! I fancy we are going to have a storm.” Four heads turned as if governed by one brain; four pairs of eyes, of varied color and character, swept the wind-blown wilderness of tender green, and gazed questioningly at the high-piled thunderheads above. A small boy, with an abundance of yellow curls and white collar, almost precipitated himself into the prim lap of a lady on the rear seat.  “Auntie, will God have fireworks? Say, auntie, will He? Can I say prayers widout kneelin' down'? Uncle Redmon' crowds so. I want to pray for fireworks, auntie. Can I?”  “Do sit down, Dorman. You'll fall under the wheel, and then auntie would not have any dear little boy. Dorman, do you hear me? Redmond, do take that child down! How I wish Parks were here. I shall have nervous prostration within a fortnight.”  Sir Redmond Hayes plucked at the white collar, and the small boy retired between two masculine forms of no mean proportions. His voice, however, rose higher.  “You'll get all the fireworks you want, young man, without all that hullabaloo,” remarked the driver, whom Dorman had been told, at the depot twenty miles back, he must call his Uncle Richard.  “I love storms,” came cheerfully from the rear seat--but the voice was not the prim voice of “auntie.” “Do you have thunder and lightning out here, Dick?”  “We do,” assented Dick. “We don't ship it from the East in refrigerator cars, either. It grows wild.”  The cheerful voice was heard to giggle.  “Richard,” came in tired, reproachful accents from a third voice behind him, “you were reared in the East. I trust you have not formed the pernicious habit of speaking slightingly of your birthplace.”  That, Dick knew, was his mother. She had not changed appreciably since she had nagged him through his teens. Not having seen her since, he was certainly in a position to judge.  “Trix asked about the lightning,” he said placatingly, just as he was accustomed to do, during the nagging period. “I was telling her.”  “Beatrice has a naturally inquiring mind,” said the tired voice, laying reproving stress upon the name.  “Are you afraid of lightning, Sir Redmond?” asked the cheerful girl-voice.  Sir Redmond twisted his neck to smile back at her. “No, so long as it doesn't actually chuck me over.”  After that there was silence, so far as human voices went, for a time.  “How much farther is it, Dick?” came presently from the girl.  “Not more than ten--well, maybe twelve--miles. You'll think it's twenty, though, if the rain strikes 'Dobe Flat before we do. That's just what it's going to do, or I'm badly mistaken. Hawk! Get along, there!”  “We haven't an umbrella with us,” complained the tired one. “Beatrice, where did you put my raglan?”  “In the big wagon, mama, along with the trunks and guns and saddles, and Martha and Katherine and James.”  “Dear me! I certainly told you, Beatrice--”  “But, mama, you gave it to me the last thing, after the maids were in the wagon, and said you wouldn't wear it. There isn't room here for another thing. I feel like a slice of pressed chicken.”  “Auntie, I want some p'essed chicken. I'm hungry, auntie! I want some chicken and a cookie--and I want some ice-cream.”  “You won't get any,” said the young woman, with the tone of finality. “You can't eat me, Dorman, and I'm the only thing that looks good enough to eat.”  “Beatrice!” This, of course, from her mother, whose life seemed principally made up of a succession of mental shocks, brought on by her youngest, dearest, and most irrepressible.  “I have Dick's word for it, mama; he said so, at the depot.”  “I want some chicken, auntie.”  “There is no chicken, dear,” said the prim one. “You must be a patient little man.”  “I won't. I'm hungry. Mens aren't patient when dey're hungry.” A small, red face rose, like a tiny harvest moon, between the broad, masculine backs on the front seat.  “Dorman, sit down! Redmond!”  A large, gloved hand appeared against the small moon and it set ignominiously and prematurely, in the place where it had risen. Sir Redmond further extinguished it with the lap robe, for the storm, whooping malicious joy, was upon them.  First a blinding glare and a deafening crash. Then rain--sheets of it, that drenched where it struck. The women huddled together under the doubtful protection of the light robe and shivered. After that, wind that threatened to overturn the light spring wagon; then hail that bounced and hopped like tiny, white rubber balls upon the ground.  The storm passed as suddenly as it came, but the effect remained. The road was sodden with the water which had fallen, and as they went down the hill to 'Dobe Flat the horses strained at the collar and plodded like a plow team. The wheels collected masses of adobe, which stuck like glue and packed the spaces between the spokes. Twice Dick got out and poked the heavy mess from the wheels with Sir Redmond's stick--which was not good for the stick, but which eased the drag upon the horses wonderfully--until the wheels accumulated another load.  “Sorry to dirty your cane,” Dick apologized, after the second halt. “You can rinse it off, though, in the creek a few miles ahead.”  “Don't mention it!” said Sir Redmond, somewhat dubiously. It was his favorite stick, and he had taken excellent care of it. It was finely polished, and it had his name and regiment engraved upon the silver knob--and a date which the Boers will not soon forget, nor the English, for that matter.  “We'll soon be over the worst,” Dick told them, after a time. “When we climb that hill we'll have a hard, gravelly trail straight to the ranch. I'm sorry it had to storm; I wanted you to enjoy this trip.”  “I am enjoying it,” Beatrice assured him. “It's something new, at any rate, and anything is better than the deadly monotony of Newport.”  “Beatrice!” cried her mother “I'm ashamed of you!”  “You needn't be, mama. Why won't you just be sorry for yourself, and let it end there? I know you hated to come, poor dear; but you wouldn't think of letting me come alone, though I'm sure I shouldn't have minded. This is going to be a delicious summer--I feel it in my bones.”  “Be-atrice!”  “Why, mama? Aren't young ladies supposed to have bones?”  “Young ladies are not supposed to make use of unrefined expressions. Your poor sister.”  “There, mama. Dear Dolly didn't live upon stilts, I'm sure. Even when she married.”  “Be-atrice!”  “Dear me, mama! I hope you are not growing peevish. Peevish elderly people--”  “Auntie! I want to go home!” the small boy wailed.  “You cannot go home now, dear,” sighed his guardian angel. “Look at the pretty--” She hesitated, groping vaguely for some object to which she might conscientiously apply the adjective.  “Mud,” suggested Beatrice promptly “Look at the wheels, Dorman; they're playing patty-cake. See, now they say, 'Roll 'em, and roll 'em,' and now, 'Toss in the oven to bake!' And now--”  “Auntie, I want to get out an' play patty-cake, like de wheels. I want to awf'lly!”  “Beatrice, why did you put that into his head?” her mother demanded, fretfully.  “Never mind, honey,” called Beatrice cheeringly. “You and I will make hundreds of mud pies when we get to Uncle Dick's ranch. Just think, hon, oodles of beautiful, yellow mud just beside the door!”  “Look here, Trix! Seems to me you're promising a whole lot you can't make good. I don't live in a 'dobe patch.”  “Hush, Dick; don't spoil everything. You don't know Dorman.'  “Beatrice! What must Miss Hayes and Sir Redmond think of you? I'm sure Dorman is a sweet child, the image of poor, dear Dorothea, at his age.”  “We all think Dorman bears a strong resemblance to his father,” said his Aunt Mary.  Beatrice, scenting trouble, hurried to change the subject. “What's this, Dick--the Missouri River?”  “Hardly. This is the water that didn't fall in the buggy. It isn't deep; it makes bad going worse, that's all.”  Thinking to expedite matters, he struck Hawk sharply across the flank. It was a foolish thing to do, and Dick knew it when he did it; ten seconds later he knew it better.  Hawk reared, tired as he was, and lunged viciously.  The double-trees snapped and splintered; there was a brief interval of plunging, a shower of muddy water in that vicinity, and then two draggled, disgusted brown horses splashed indignantly to shore and took to the hills with straps flying.  “By George!” ejaculated Sir Redmond, gazing helplessly after them. “But this is a beastly bit of luck, don't you know!”  “Oh, you Hawk--” Dick, in consideration of his companions, finished the remark in the recesses of his troubled soul, where the ladies could not overhear.  “What comes next, Dick?” The voice of Beatrice was frankly curious.  “Next, I'll have to wade out and take after those--” This sentence, also, was rounded out mentally.  “In the meantime, what shall we do?”  “You'll stay where you are--and thank the good Lord you were not upset. I'm sorry,”--turning so that he could look deprecatingly at Miss Hayes--“your welcome to the West has been so--er--strenuous. I'll try and make it up to you, once you get to the ranch. I hope you won't let this give you a dislike of the country.”  “Oh, no,” said the spinster politely. “I'm sure it is a--a very nice country, Mr. Lansell.”  “Well, there's nothing to be done sitting here.” Dick climbed down over the dashboard into the mud and water.  Sir Redmond was not the man to shirk duty because it happened to be disagreeable, as the regiment whose name was engraved upon his cane could testify. He glanced regretfully at his immaculate leggings and followed.  “I fancy you ladies won't need any bodyguard,” he said. Looking back, he caught the light of approval shining in the eyes of Beatrice, and after that he did not mind the mud, but waded to shore and joined in the chase quite contentedly. The light of approval, shining in the eyes of Beatrice, meant much to Sir Redmond.    CHAPTER 2. A Handsome Cowboy to the Rescue.   Beatrice took immediate possession of the front seat, that she might comfort her heartbroken young nephew.  “Never mind, honey. They'll bring the horses back in a minute, and we'll make them run every step. And when you get to Uncle Dick's ranch you'll see the nicest things--bossy calves, and chickens, and, maybe, some little pigs with curly tails.”  All this, though alluring, failed of its purpose; the small boy continued to weep, and his weeping was ear-splitting.  “Be still, Dorman, or you'll certainly scare all the coyotes to death.”  “Where are dey?”  “Oh, all around. You keep watch, hon, and maybe you'll see one put the tip of his nose over a hill.”  “What hill?” Dorman skipped a sob, and scoured his eyes industriously with both fists.  “M-m--that hill. That little one over there. Watch close, or you'll miss him.”  The dove of peace hovered over them, and seemed actually about to alight. Beatrice leaned back with a relieved breath.  “It is good of you, my dear, to take so much trouble,” sighed his Aunt Mary. “How I am to manage without Parks I'm sure I cannot tell.”  “You are tired, and you miss your tea.” soothed Beatrice, optimistic as to tone. “When we all have a good rest we will be all right. Dorman will find plenty to amuse him. We are none of us exactly comfortable now.”  “Comfortable!” sniffed her mother. “I am half dead. Richard wrote such glowing letters home that I was misled. If I had dreamed of the true conditions, Miss Hayes, I should never have sanctioned this wild idea of Beatrice's to come out and spend the summer with Richard.”  “It's coming, Be'trice! There it is! Will it bite, auntie? Say, will it bite?”  Beatrice looked. A horseman came over the hill and was galloping down the long slope toward them. His elbows were lifted contrary to the mandates of the riding-school, his long legs were encased in something brown and fringed down the sides. His gray hat was tilted rakishly up at the back and down in front, and a handkerchief was knotted loosely around his throat. Even at that distance he struck her as different from any one she had ever seen.  “It's a highwayman!” whispered Mrs. Lansell “Hide your purse, my dear!”  “I--I--where?” Miss Hayes was all a-flutter with fear.  “Drop it down beside the wheel, into the water. Quick! I shall drop my watch.”  “He--he is coming on this side! He can see!” Her whisper was full of entreaty and despair.  “Give them here. He can't see on both sides of the buggy at once.” Mrs. Lansell, being an American--a Yankee at that--was a woman of resource.  “Beatrice, hand me your watch quick!”  Beatrice paid no attention, and there was no time to insist upon obedience. The horseman had slowed at the water's edge, and was regarding them with some curiosity. Possibly he was not accustomed to such a sight as the one that met his eyes. He came splashing toward them, however, as though he intended to investigate the cause of their presence, alone upon the prairie, in a vehicle which had no horses attached in the place obviously intended for such attachment. When he was close upon them he stopped and lifted the rakishly tilted gray hat.  “You seem to be in trouble. Is there anything I can do for you?” His manner was grave and respectful, but his eyes, Beatrice observed, were having a quiet laugh of their own.  “You can't get auntie's watch, nor gran'mama's. Gran'mama frowed 'em all down in the mud. She frowed her money down in the mud, too,” announced Dorman, with much complacency. “Be'trice says you is a coyote. Is you?”  There was a stunned interval, during which nothing was heard but the wind whispering things to the grass. The man's eyes stopped laughing; his jaw set squarely; also, his brows drew perceptibly closer together. It was Mrs. Lansell's opinion that he looked murderous.  Then Beatrice put her head down upon the little, blue velvet cap of Dorman and laughed. There was a rollicking note in her laughter that was irresistible, and the eyes of the man relented and joined in her mirth. His lips forgot they were angry and insulted, and uncovered some very nice teeth.  “We aren't really crazy,” Beatrice told him, sitting up straight and drying her eyes daintily with her handkerchief. “We were on our way to Mr. Lansell's ranch, and the horses broke something and ran away, and Dick--Mr. Lansell--has gone to catch them. We're waiting until he does.”  “I see.” From the look in his eyes one might guess that what he saw pleased him. “Which direction did they take?”  Beatrice waved a gloved hand vaguely to the left, and, without another word, the fellow touched his hat, turned and waded to shore and galloped over the ridge she indicated; and the clucketycluck of his horse's hoofs came sharply across to them until he dipped out of sight.  “You see, he wasn't a robber,” Beatrice remarked, staring after him speculatively. “How well he rides! One can see at a glance that he almost lives in the saddle. I wonder who he is.”  “For all you know, Beatrice, he may be going now to murder Richard and Sir Redmond in cold blood. He looks perfectly hardened.”  “Oh, do you think it possible?” cried Miss Hayes, much alarmed.  “No!” cried Beatrice hotly. “One who did not know your horror of novels, mama, might suspect you of feeding your imagination upon 'penny dreadfuls.' I'm sure he is only a cowboy, and won't harm anybody.”  “Cowboys are as bad as highwaymen,” contended her mother, “or worse. I have read how they shoot men for a pastime, and without even the excuse of robbery.”  “Is it possible?” quavered Miss Hayes faintly.  “No, it isn't!” Beatrice assured her indignantly.  “He has the look of a criminal,” declared Mrs. Lansell, in the positive tone of one who speaks from intimate knowledge of the subject under discussion. “I only hope he isn't going to murder--”  “They're coming back, mama,” interrupted Beatrice, who had been watching closely the hilltop. “No, it's that man, and he is driving the horses.”  “He's chasing them,” corrected her mother testily. “A horse thief, no doubt. He's going to catch them with his snare--”  “Lasso, mama.”  “Well, lasso. Where can Richard be? To think the fellow should be so bold! But out here, with miles upon miles of open, and no police protection anything is possible. We might all be murdered, and no one be the wiser for days--perhaps weeks. There, he has caught them.” She leaned back and clasped her hands, ready to meet with fortitude whatever fate might have in store.  “He's bringing them out to us, mama. Can't you see the man is only trying to help us?”  Mrs. Lansell, beginning herself to suspect him of honest intentions, sniffed dissentingly and let it go at that. The fellow was certainly leading the horses toward them, and Sir Redmond and Dick, appearing over the hill just then, proved beyond doubt that neither had been murdered in cold blood, or in any other unpleasant manner.  “We're all right now, mother,” Dick called, the minute he was near enough.  His mother remarked skeptically that she hoped possibly she had been in too great haste to conceal her valuables--that Miss Hayes might not feel grateful for her presence of mind, and was probably wondering if mud baths were not injurious to fine, jeweled time-pieces. Mrs. Lansell was uncomfortable, mentally and physically, and her manner was frankly chilly when her son presented the stranger as his good friend and neighbor, Keith Cameron. She was still privately convinced that he looked a criminal--though, if pressed, she must surely have admitted that he was an uncommonly good-looking young outlaw. It would seem almost as if she regarded his being a decent, law-abiding citizen as pure effrontery.  Miss Hayes greeted him with a smile of apprehension which plainly amused him. Beatrice was frankly impersonal in her attitude; he represented a new species of the genus man, and she, too, evidently regarded him in the light of a strange animal, viewed unexpectedly at close range.  While he was helping Dick mend the double-tree with a piece of rope, she studied him curiously. He was tall--taller even than Sir Redmond, and more slender. Sir Redmond had the straight, sturdy look of the soldier who had borne the brunt of hard marches and desperate fighting; Mr. Cameron, the lithe, unconscious grace and alertness of the man whose work demands quick movement and quicker eye and brain. His face was tanned to a clear bronze which showed the blood darkly beneath; Sir Redmond's year of peace had gone far toward lightening his complexion. Beatrice glanced briefly at him and admired his healthy color, and was glad he did not have the look of an Indian. At the same time, she caught herself wishing that Sir Redmond's eyes were hazel, fringed with very long, dark lashes and topped with very straight, dark brows--eyes which seemed always to have some secret cause for mirth, and to laugh quite independent of the rest of the face. Still, Sir Redmond had very nice eyes--blue, and kind, and steadfast, and altogether dependable--and his lashes were quite nice enough for any one. In just four seconds Beatrice decided that, after all, she did not like hazel eyes that twinkle continually; they make one feel that one is being laughed at, which is not comfortable. In six seconds she was quite sure that this Mr. Cameron thought himself handsome, and Beatrice detested a man who was proud of his face or his figure; such a man always tempted her to “make faces,”  as she used to do over the back fence when she was little.  She mentally accused him of trying to show off his skill with his rope when he leaned and fastened it to the rig, rode out ahead and helped drag the vehicle to shore; and it was with some resentment that she observed the ease with which he did it, and how horse and rope seemed to know instinctively their master's will, and to obey of their own accord.  In all that he had done--and it really seemed as if he did everything that needed to be done, while Dick pottered around in the way--he had not found it necessary to descend into the mud and water, to the ruin of his picturesque, fringed chaps and high-heeled boots. He had worked at ease, carelessly leaning from his leathern throne upon the big, roan horse he addressed occasionally as Redcloud. Beatrice wondered where he got the outlandish name. But, with all his imperfections, she was glad she had met him. He really was handsome, whether he knew it or not; and if he had a good opinion of himself, and overrated his actions--all the more fun for herself! Beatrice, I regret to say, was not above amusing herself with handsome young men who overrate their own charms; in fact, she had the reputation among her women acquaintances of being a most outrageous flirt.  In the very middle of these trouble-breeding meditations, Mr. Cameron looked up unexpectedly and met keenly her eyes; and for some reason--let us hope because of a guilty conscience--Beatrice grew hot and confused; an unusual experience, surely, for a girl who had been out three seasons, and has met calmly the eyes of many young men. Until now it had been the young men who grew hot and confused; it had never been herself.  Beatrice turned her shoulder toward him, and looked at Sir Redmond, who was surreptitiously fishing for certain articles beside the rear wheel, at the whispered behest of Mrs. Lansell, and was certainly a sight to behold. He was mud to his knees and to his elbows, and he had managed to plaster his hat against the wheel and to dirty his face. Altogether, he looked an abnormally large child who has been having a beautiful day of it in somebody's duck-pond; but Beatrice was nearer, at that moment, to loving him than she had been at any time during her six weeks' acquaintance with him--and that is saying much, for she had liked him from the start.  Mr. Cameron followed her glance, and his eyes did not have the laugh all to themselves; his voice joined them, and Beatrice turned upon him and frowned. It was not kind of him to laugh at a man who is proving his heart to be much larger than his vanity; Beatrice was aware of Sir Redmond's immaculateness of attire on most occasions.  “Well,” said Dick, gathering up the reins, “you've helped us out of a bad scrape, Keith. Come over and take dinner with us to-morrow night. I expect we'll be kept riding the rim-rocks, over at the Pool, this summer. Unless this sister of mine has changed a lot, she won't rest till she's been over every foot of country for forty miles around. It will just about keep our strings rode down to a whisper keeping her in sight.”  “Dear me, Richard!” said his mother. “What Jargon is this you speak?”  “That's good old Montana English, mother. You'll learn it yourself before you leave here. I've clean forgot how they used the English language at Yale, haven't you, Keith?”  “Just about,” Keith agreed. “I'm afraid we'll shock the ladies terribly, Dick. We ought to get out on a pinnacle with a good grammar and practice.”  “Well, maybe. We'll look for you to-morrow, sure. I want you to help map out a circle or two for Trix. About next week she'll want to get out and scour the range.”  “Dear me, Richard! Beatrice is not a charwoman!” This, you will understand, was from his mother; perhaps you will also understand that she spoke with the rising inflection which conveys a reproof.  When Keith Cameron left them he was laughing quietly to himself, and Beatrice's chin was set rather more than usual.    CHAPTER 3. A Tilt With Sir Redmond.   Beatrice, standing on the top of a steep, grassy slope, was engaged in the conventional pastime of enjoying the view. It was a fine view, but it was not half as good to look upon as was Beatrice herself, in her fresh white waist and brown skirt, with her brown hair fluffing softly in the breeze which would grow to a respectable wind later in the day, and with her cheeks pink from climbing.  She was up where she could see the river, a broad band of blue in the surrounding green, winding away for miles through the hills. The far bank stood a straight two hundred feet of gay-colored rock, chiseled, by time and stress of changeful weather, into fanciful turrets and towers. Above and beyond, where the green began, hundreds of moving dots told where the cattle were feeding quietly. Far away to the south, heaps of hazy blue and purple slept in the sunshine; Dick had told her those were the Highwoods. And away to the west, a jagged line of blue-white glimmered and stood upon tip-toes to touch the swimming clouds--touched them and pushed above proudly; those were the Rockies. The Bear Paws stood behind her; nearer they were--so near they lost the glamour of mysterious blue shadows, and became merely a sprawling group of huge, pine-covered hills, with ranches dotted here and there in sheltered places, with squares of fresh, dark green that spoke of growing crops.  Ten days, and the metropolitan East had faded and become as hazy and vague as the Highwoods. Ten days, and the witchery of the West leaped in her blood and held her fast in its thralldom.  A sound of scrambling behind her was immediately followed by a smothered epithet. Beatrice turned in time to see Sir Redmond pick himself up.  “These grass slopes are confounded slippery, don't you know,” he explained apologetically. “How did you manage that climb?”  “I didn't.” Beatrice smiled. “I came around the end, where the ascent is gradual; there's a good path.”  “Oh!” Sir Redmond sat down upon a rock and puffed. “I saw you up here--and a fellow doesn't think about taking a roundabout course to reach his heart's--”  “Isn't it lovely?” Beatrice made haste to inquire.  “Lovely isn't half expressive enough,” he told her. “You look--”  “The river is so very blue and dignified. I've been wondering if it has forgotten how it must have danced through those hills, away off there. When it gets down to the cities--this blue water--it will be muddy and nasty looking. The 'muddy Missouri' certainly doesn't apply here. And that farther shore is simply magnificent. I wish I might stay here forever.”  “The Lord forbid!” cried he, with considerable fervor. “There's a dear nook in old England where I hope--”  “You did get that mud off your leggings, I see,” Beatrice remarked inconsequentially. “James must have worked half the time we've been here. They certainly were in a mess the last time I saw them.”  “Bother the leggings! But I take it that's a good sign, Miss Lansell--your taking notice of such things.”  Beatrice returned to the landscape. “I wonder who originated that phrase, 'The cattle grazing on a thousand hills'? He must have stood just here when he said it.”  “Wasn't it one of your American poets? Longfellow, or--er--”  Beatrice simply looked at him a minute and said “Pshaw!”  “Well,” he retorted, “you don't know yourself who it was.”  “And to think,” Beatrice went on, ignoring the subject, “some of those grazing cows and bossy calves are mine--my very own. I never cared before, or thought much about it, till I came out and saw where they live, and Dick pointed to a cow and the sweetest little red and white calf, and said: 'That's your cow and calf, Trix.' They were dreadfully afraid of me, though--I'm afraid they didn't recognize me as their mistress. I wanted to get down and pet the calf--it had the dearest little snub nose but they bolted, and wouldn't let me near them.”  “I fancy they were not accustomed to meeting angels unawares.”  “Sir Redmond, I wish you wouldn't. You are so much nicer when you're not trying to be nice.”  “I'll act a perfect brute,” he offered eagerly, “if that will make you love me.”  “It's hardly worth trying. I think you would make a very poor sort of villain, Sir Redmond. You wouldn't even be picturesque.”  Sir Redmond looked rather floored. He was a good fighter, was Sir Redmond, but he was clumsy at repartee--or, perhaps, he was too much in earnest to fence gracefully. Just now he looked particularly foolish.  “Don't you think my brand is pretty? You know what it is, don't you?”  “I'm afraid not,” he owned. “I fancy I need a good bit of coaching in the matter of brands.”  “Yes,” agreed Beatrice, “I fancy you do. My brand is a Triangle Bar--like this.” With a sharp pointed bit of rock she drew a more or less exact diagram in the yellow soil. “There are ever so many different brands belonging to the Northern Pool; Dick pointed them out to me, but I can't remember them. But whenever you see a Triangle Bar you'll be looking at my individual property. I think it was nice of Dick to give me a brand all my own. Mr. Cameron has a pretty brand, too--a Maltese Cross. The Maltese Cross was owned at one time by President Roosevelt. Mr. Cameron bought it when he left college and went into the cattle business. He 'plays a lone hand,' as he calls it; but his cattle range with the Northern Pool, and he and Dick work together a great deal. I think he has lovely eyes, don't you?” The eyes of Beatrice were intent upon the Bear Paws when she said it--which brought her shoulder toward Sir Redmond and hid her face from him.  “I can't say I ever observed Mr. Cameron's eyes,” said Sir Redmond stiffly.  Beatrice turned back to him, and smiled demurely. When Beatrice smiled that very demure smile, of which she was capable, the weather-wise generally edged toward their cyclone-cellars. Sir Redmond was not weather-wise--he was too much in love with her--and he did not possess a cyclone cellar; he therefore suffered much at the hands of Beatrice.  “But surely you must have noticed that deep, deep dimple in his chin?”  she questioned innocently. Keith Cameron, I may say, did not have a dimple in his chin at all; there was, however, a deep crease in it.  “I did not.” Sir Redmond rubbed his own chin, which was so far from dimpling that is was rounded like half an apricot.  “Dear me! And you sat opposite to him at dinner yesterday, too! I suppose, then, you did not observe that his teeth are the whitest, evenest.”  “They make them cheaply over here, I'm told,” he retorted, setting his heel emphatically down and annihilating a red and black caterpillar.  “Now, why did you do that? I must say you English are rather brutal?”  “I can't abide worms.”  “Well, neither can I. And I think it would be foolish to quarrel about a man's good looks,” Beatrice said, with surprising sweetness.  Sir Redmond hunched his shoulders and retreated to the comfort of his pipe. “A bally lot of good looks!” he sneered. “A woman is never convinced, though.”  “I am.” Beatrice sat down upon a rock and rested her elbows on her knees and her chin in her hands--and an adorable picture she made, I assure you. “I'm thoroughly convinced of several things. One is Mr. Cameron's good looks; another is that you're cross.”  “Oh, come, now!” protested Sir Redmond feebly, and sucked furiously at his pipe.  “Yes,” reiterated Beatrice, examining his perturbed face judicially; “you are downright ugly.”  The face of Sir Redmond grew redder and more perturbed; just as Beatrice meant that it should; she seemed to derive a keen pleasure from goading this big, good-looking Englishman to the verge of apoplexy.  “I'm sure I never meant to be rude; but a fellow can't fall down and worship every young farmer, don't you know--not even to please you!”  Beatrice smiled and threw a pebble down the slope, watching it bound and skip to the bottom, where it rolled away and hid in the grass.  “I love this wide country,” she observed, abandoning her torture with a suddenness that was a characteristic of her nature. When Beatrice had made a man look and act the fool she was ready to stop; one cannot say that of every woman. “One can draw long, deep breaths without robbing one's neighbor of oxygen. Everything is so big, and broad, and generous, out here. One can ride for miles and miles through the grandest, wildest places,--and--there aren't any cigar and baking-powder and liver-pill signs plastered over the rocks, thank goodness! If man has traveled that way before, you do not have the evidence of his passing staring you in the face. You can make believe it is all your own--by right of discovery. I'm afraid your England would seem rather little and crowded after a month or two of this.” She swept her hand toward the river, and the grass-land beyond, and the mountains rimming the world.  “You should see the moors!” cried Sir Redmond, brightening under this peaceful mood of hers. “I fancy you would not find trouble in drawing long breaths there. Moor Cottage, where your sister and Wiltmar lived, is surrounded by wide stretches of open--not like this, to be sure, but not half-bad in its way, either.”  “Dolly grew to love that place, though she did write homesick letters at first. I was going over, after my coming out--and then came that awful accident, when she and Wiltmar were both drowned--and, of course, there was nothing to go for. I should have hated the place then, I think. But I should like--” Her voice trailed off dreamily, her eyes on the hazy Highwoods.  Sir Redmond watched her, his eyes a-shine; Beatrice in this mood was something to worship. He was almost afraid to speak, for fear she would snuff out the tiny flame of hope which her half-finished sentence had kindled. He leaned forward, his face eager.  “Beatrice, only say you will go--with me, dear!”  Beatrice started; for the moment she had forgotten him. Her eyes kept to the hills. “Go--to England? One trip at a time, Sir Redmond. I have been here only ten days, and we came for three months. Three months of freedom in this big, glorious place.”  “And then?” His voice was husky.  “And then--freckle lotions by the quart, I expect.”  Sir Redmond got upon his feet, and he was rather white around the mouth.  “We Englishmen are a stubborn lot, Miss Beatrice. We won't stop fighting until we win.”  “We Yankees,” retorted she airily, “value our freedom above everything else. We won't surrender it without fighting for it first.”  He caught eagerly at the lack of finality in her tones. “I don't want to take your freedom, Beatrice. I only want the right to love you.”  “Oh, as for that, I suppose you may love me as much as you please--only so you don't torment me to death talking about it.”  Beatrice, not looking particularly tormented, waved answer to Dick, who was shouting something up at her, and went blithely down the hill, with Sir Redmond following gloomily, several paces behind.    CHAPTER 4. Beatrice Learns a New Language.   “D'you want to see the boys work a bunch of cattle, Trix?” Dick said to her, when she came down to where he was leaning against a high board fence, waiting for her.  “'Deed I do, Dicky--only I've no idea what you mean.”  “The boys are going to cut out some cattle we've contracted to the government--for the Indians, you know. They're holding the bunch over in Dry Coulee; it's only three or four miles. I've got to go over and see the foreman, and I thought maybe you'd like to go along.”  “There's nothing I can think of that I would like better. Won't it be fine, Sir Redmond?”  Sir Redmond did not say whether he thought it would be fine or not. He still had the white streak around his mouth, and he went through the gate and on to the house without a word--which was undoubtedly a rude thing to do. Sir Redmond was not often rude. Dick watched him speculatively until he was beyond hearing them. Then, “What have you done to milord, Trix?” he wanted to know.  “Nothing,” said Beatrice.  “Well,” Dick said, with decision, “he looks to me like a man that has been turned down--hard. I can tell by the back of his neck.”  This struck Beatrice, and she began to study the retreating neck of her suitor. “I can't see any difference,” she announced, after a brief scrutiny.  “It's rather sunburned and thick.”  “I'll gamble his mind is a jumble of good English oaths--with maybe a sprinkling of Boer maledictions. What did you do?”  “Nothing--unless, perhaps, he objects to being disciplined a bit. But I also object to being badgered into matrimony--even with Sir Redmond.”  “Even with Sir Redmond!” Dick whistled. “He's 'It,' then, is he?”  Beatrice had nothing to say. She walked beside Dick and looked at the ground before her.  “He doesn't seem a bad sort, sis, and the title will be nice to have in the family, if one cares for such things. Mother does. She was disappointed, I take it, that Wiltmar was a younger son.”  “Yes, she was. She used to think that Sir Redmond might get killed down there fighting the Boers, and then Wiltmar would be next in line. But he didn't, and it was Wiltmar who went first. And now oh, it's humiliating, Dick! To be thrown at a man's head--” Tears were not far from her voice just then.  “I can see she wants you to nab the title. Well, sis, if you don't care for the man--”  “I never said I didn't care for him. But I just can't treat him decently, with mama dinning that title in my ears day and night. I wish there wasn't any title. Oh, it's abominable! Things have come to that point where an American girl with money is not supposed to care for an Englishman, no matter how nice he may be, if he has a title, or the prospect of one. Every one laughs and thinks it's the title she wants; they'd think it of me, and they'd say it. They would say Beatrice Lansell took her half-million and bought her a lord. And, after a while, perhaps Sir Redmond himself would half-believe it--and I couldn't bear that! And so I am--unbearably flippant and--I should think he'd hate me!”  “So you reversed the natural order of things, and refused him on account of the title?” Dick grinned surreptitiously.  “No, I didn't--not quite. I'm afraid he's dreadfully angry with me, though. I do wish he wasn't such a dear.”  “You're the same old Trix. You've got to be held back from the trail you're supposed to take, or you won't travel it; you'll bolt the other way. If everybody got together and fought the notion, you would probably elope with milord inside a week. Mother means well, but she isn't on to her job a little bit. She ought to turn up her nose at the title.”  “No fear of that! I've had it before my eyes till I hate the very thought of it. I--I wish I could hate him.” Beatrice sighed deeply, and gave her hand to Dorman, who scurried up to her.  “I'll have the horses saddled right away,” said Dick, and left them.  “Where you going, Be'trice? You going to ride a horse? I want to, awf'lly.”  “I'm afraid you can't, honey; it's too far.” Beatrice pushed a yellow curl away from his eyes with tender, womanly solicitude.  “Auntie won't care, 'cause I'm a bother. Auntie says she's goin' to send for Parks. I don't want Parks; 'sides, Parks is sick. I want a pony, and some ledder towsers wis fringes down 'em, and I want some little wheels on my feet. Mr. Cam'ron says I do need some little wheels, Be'trice.”  “Did he, honey?”  “Yes, he did. I like Mr. Cam'ron, Be'trice; he let me ride his big, high pony. He's a berry good pony. He shaked hands wis me, Be'trice--he truly did.”  “Did he, hon?” Beatrice, I am sorry to say, was not listening. She was wondering if Sir Redmond was really angry with her--too angry, for instance, to go over where the cattle were. He really ought to go, for he had come West in the interest of the Eastern stockholders in the Northern Pool, to investigate the actual details of the work. He surely would not miss this opportunity, Beatrice thought. And she hoped he was not angry.  “Yes, he truly did. Mr. Cam'ron interduced us, Be'trice. He said, 'Redcloud, dis is Master Dorman Hayes. Shake hands wis my frien' Dorman.' And he put up his front hand, Be'trice, and nod his head, and I shaked his hand. I dess love that big, high pony, Be'trice. Can I buy him, Be'trice?”  “Maybe, kiddie.”  “Can I buy him wis my six shiny pennies, Be'trice?”  “Maybe.”  “Mr. Cam'ron lives right over that hill, Be'trice. He told me.”  “Did he, hon?”  “Yes, he did. He 'vited me over, Be'trice. He's my friend, and I've got to buy my big, high pony. I'll let you shake hands wis him, Be'trice. I'll interduce him to you. And I'll let you ride on his back, Be'trice. Do you want to ride on his back?”  “Yes, honey.”  Before Beatrice had time to commit herself they reached the house, and she let go Dorman's hand and hurried away to get into her riding-habit.  Dorman straightway went to find his six precious, shiny pennies, which Beatrice had painstakingly scoured with silver polish one day to please the little tyrant, and which increased their value many times--so many times, in fact, that he hid them every night in fear of burglars. Since he concealed them each time in a different place, he was obliged to ransack his auntie's room every morning, to the great disturbance of Martha, the maid, who was an order-loving person.  Martha appeared just when he had triumphantly pounced upon his treasure rolled up in the strings of his aunt's chiffon opera-bonnet.  “Mercy upon us, Master Dorman! Whatever have you been doing?”  “I want my shiny pennies,” said the young gentleman, composedly unwinding the roll, “to buy my big, high pony.”  “Naughty, naughty boy, to muss my lady's fine bonnet like that! Look at things scattered over the floor, and my lady's fine handkerchiefs and gloves--” Martha stopped and meditated whether she might dare to shake him.  Dorman was laboriously counting his wealth, with much wrinkling of stubby nose and lifting of eyebrows. Having satisfied himself that they were really all there, he deigned to look around, with a fine masculine disdain of woman's finery.  “Oh, dose old things!” he sniffed. “I always fordet where I put my shiny pennies. Robbers might find them if I put them easy places. I'm going to buy my big, high pony, and you can't shake his hand a bit, Martha.”  “Well, I'm sure I don't want to!” Martha snapped back at him, and went down on all fours to gather up the things he had thrown down. “Whatever Parks was thinking of, to go and get fever, when she was the only one that could manage you, I don't know! And me picking up after you till I'm fair sick!”  “I'm glad you is sick,” he retorted unfeelingly, and backed to the door. “I hopes you get sicker so your stummit makes you hurt. You can't ride on my big, high pony.”  “Get along with you and your high pony!” cried the exasperated Martha, threatening with a hairbrush. Dorman, his six shiny pennies held fast in his damp little fist, fled down the stairs and out into the sunlight.  Dick and Beatrice were just ready to ride away from the porch. “I want to go wis you, Uncle Dick.” Dorman had followed the lead of Beatrice, his divinity; he refused to say Richard, though grandmama did object to nicknames.  “Up you go, son. You'll be a cow-puncher yourself one of these days. I'll not let him fall, and this horse is gentle.” This last to satisfy Dorman's aunt, who wavered between anxiety and relief.  “You may ride to the gate, Dorman, and then you'll have to hop down and run back to your auntie and grandma. We're going too far for you to-day.” Dick gave him the reins to hold, and let the horse walk to prolong the joy of it.  Dorman held to the horn with one hand, to the reins with the other, and let his small body swing forward and back with the motion of the horse, in exaggerated imitation of his friend, Mr. Cameron. At the gate he allowed himself to be set down without protest, smiled importantly through the bars, and thrust his arm through as far as it would reach, that he might wave good-by. And his divinity smiled back at him, and threw him a kiss, which pleased him mightily.  “You must have hurt milord's feelings pretty bad,” Dick remarked. “I couldn't get him to come. He had to write a letter first, he said.”  “I wish, Dick,” Beatrice answered, a bit petulantly, “you would stop calling him milord.”  “Milord's a good name,” Dick contended. “It's bad enough to 'Sir' him to his face; I can't do it behind his back, Trix. We're not used to fancy titles out here, and they don't fit the country, anyhow. I'm like you--I'd think a lot more of him if he was just a plain, everyday American, so I could get acquainted enough to call him 'Red Hayes.' I'd like him a whole lot better.”  Beatrice was in no mood for an argument--on that subject, at least. She let Rex out and raced over the prairie at a gait which would have greatly shocked her mother, who could not understand why Beatrice was not content to drive sedately about in the carriage with the rest of them.  When they reached the round-up Keith Cameron left the bunch and rode out to meet them, and Dick promptly shuffled responsibility for his sister's entertainment to the square shoulders of his neighbor.  “Trix wants to wise up on the cattle business, Keith. I'll just turn her over to you for a-while, and let you answer her questions; I can't, half the time. I want to look through the bunch a little.”  Keith's face spoke gratitude, and spoke it plainly. The face of Beatrice was frankly inattentive. She was watching the restless, moving mass of red backs and glistening horns, with horsemen weaving in and out among them in what looked to her a perfectly aimless fashion--until one would wheel and dart out into the open, always with a fleeing animal lumbering before. Other horsemen would meet him and take up the chase, and he would turn and ride leisurely back into the haze and confusion. It was like a kaleidoscope, for the scene shifted constantly and was never quite the same.  Keith, secure in her absorption, slid sidewise in the saddle and studied her face, knowing all the while that he was simply storing up trouble for himself. But it is not given a man to flee human nature, and the fellow who could sit calmly beside Beatrice and not stare at her if the opportunity offered must certainly have the blood of a fish in his veins. I will tell you why.  Beatrice was tall, and she was slim, and round, and tempting, with the most tantalizing curves ever built to torment a man. Her hair was soft and brown, and it waved up from the nape of her neck without those short, straggling locks and thin growth at the edge which mar so many feminine heads; and the sharp contrast of shimmery brown against ivory white was simply irresistible. Had her face been less full of charm, Keith might have been content to gaze and gaze at that lovely hair line. As it was, his eyes wandered to her brows, also distinctly marked, as though outlined first with a pencil in the fingers of an artist who understood. And there were her lashes, dark and long, and curled up at the ends; and her cheek, with its changing, come-and-go coloring; her mouth, with its upper lip creased deeply in the middle--so deeply that a bit more would have been a defect--and with an odd little dimple at one corner; luckily, it was on the side toward him, so that he might look at it all he wanted to for once; for it was always there, only growing deeper and wickeder when she spoke or laughed. He could not see her eyes, for they were turned away, but he knew quite well the color; he had settled that point when he looked up from coiling his rope the day she came. They were big, baffling, blue-brown eyes, the like of which he had never seen before in his life--and he had thought he had seen every color and every shade under the sun. Thinking of them and their wonderful deeps and shadows, he got hungry for a sight of them. And suddenly she turned to ask a question, and found him staring at her, and surprised a look in his eyes he did not know was there.  For ten pulse-beats they stared, and the cheeks of Beatrice grew red as healthy young blood could paint them; Keith's were the same, only that his blood showed darkly through the tan. What question had been on her tongue she forgot to ask. Indeed, for the time, I think she forgot the whole English language, and every other--but the strange, wordless language of Keith's clear eyes.  And then it was gone, and Keith was looking away, and chewing a corner of his lip till it hurt. His horse backed restlessly from the tight-gripped rein, and Keith was guilty of kicking him with his spur, which did not better matters. Redcloud snorted and shook his outraged head, and Keith came to himself and eased the rein, and spoke remorseful, soothing words that somehow clung long in the memory of Beatrice.  Just after that Dick galloped up, his elbows flapping like the wings of a frightened hen.  “Well, I suppose you could run a cow outfit all by yourself, with the knowledge you've got from Keith,” he greeted, and two people became even more embarrassed than before. If Dick noticed anything, he must have been a wise young man, for he gave no sign.  But Beatrice had not queened it in her set, three seasons, for nothing, even if she was capable of being confused by a sweet, new language in a man's eyes. She answered Dick quietly.  “I've been so busy watching it all that I haven't had time to ask many questions, as Mr. Cameron can testify. It's like a game, and it's very fascinating--and dusty. I wonder if I might ride in among them, Dick?”  “Better not, sis. It isn't as much fun as it looks, and you can see more out here. There comes milord; he must have changed his mind about the letter.”  Beatrice did not look around. To see her, you would swear she had set herself the task of making an accurate count of noses in that seething mass of raw beef below her. After a minute she ventured to glance furtively at Keith, and, finding his eyes turned her way, blushed again and called herself an idiot. After that, she straightened in the saddle, and became the self-poised Miss Lansell, of New York.  Keith rode away to the far side of the herd, out of temptation; queer a man never runs from a woman until it is too late to be a particle of use. Keith simply changed his point of view, and watched his Heart's Desire from afar.    CHAPTER 5. The Search for Dorman.   “Oh, I say,” began Sir Redmond, an hour after, when he happened to stand close to Beatrice for a few minutes, “where is Dorman? I fancied you brought him along.”  “We didn't,” Beatrice told him. “He only rode as far as the gate, where Dick left him, and started him back to the house.”  “Mary told me he came along. She and your mother were congratulating each other upon a quiet half-day, with you and Dorman off the place together. I'll wager their felicitations fell rather flat.”  Beatrice laughed. “Very likely. I know they were mourning because their lace-making had been neglected lately. What with that trip to Lost Canyon to-morrow, and to the mountains Friday, I'm afraid the lace will continue to suffer. What do you think of a round-up, Sir Redmond?”  “It's deuced nasty,” said he. “Such a lot of dust and noise. I fancy the workmen don't find it pleasant.”  “Yes, they do; they like it,” she declared. “Dick says a cowboy is never satisfied off the range. And you mustn't call them workmen, Sir Redmond. They'd resent it, if they knew. They're cowboys, and proud of it. They seem rather a pleasant lot of fellows, on the whole. I have been talking to one or two.”  “Well, we're all through here,” Dick announced, riding up. “I'm going to ride around by Keith's place, to see a horse I'm thinking of buying. Want to go along, Trix? Or are you tired?”  “I'm never tired,” averred his sister, readjusting a hat-pin and gathering up her reins. “I always want to go everywhere that you'll take me, Dick. Consider that point settled for the summer. Are you coming, Sir Redmond?”  “I think not, thank you,” he said, not quite risen above his rebuff of the morning. “I told Mary I would be back for lunch.”  “I was wiser; I refused even to venture an opinion as to when I should be back. Well, 'so-long'!”  “You're learning the lingo pretty fast, Trix,” Dick chuckled, when they were well away from Sir Redmond. “Milord almost fell out of the saddle when you fired that at him. Where did you pick it up?”  “I've heard you say it a dozen times since I came. And I don't care if he is shocked--I wanted him to be. He needn't be such a perfect bear; and I know mama and Miss Hayes don't expect him to lunch, without us. He just did it to be spiteful.”  “Jerusalem, Trix! A little while ago you said he was a dear! You shouldn't snub him, if you want him to be nice to you.”  “I don't want him to be nice,” flared Beatrice. “I don't care how he acts. Only, I must say, ill humor doesn't become him. Not that it matters, however.”  “Well, I guess we can get along without him, if he won't honor us with his company. Here comes Keith. Brace up, sis, and be pleasant.”  Beatrice glanced casually at the galloping figure of Dick's neighbor, and frowned.  “You mustn't flirt with Keith,” Dick admonished gravely. “He's a good fellow, and as square a man as I know; but you ought to know he's got the reputation of being a hard man to know. Lots of girls have tried to flirt and make a fool of him, and wound up with their feelings hurt worse than his were.”  “Is that a dare?” Beatrice threw up her chin with a motion Dick knew of old.  “Not on your life! You better leave him alone; one or the other of you would get the worst of it, and I'd hate to see either of you feeling bad. As I said before, he's a bad man to fool with.”  “I don't consider him particularly dangerous--or interesting. He's not half as nice as Sir Redmond.” Beatrice spoke as though she meant what she said, and Dick had no chance to argue the point, for Keith pulled up beside them at that moment.  Beatrice seemed inclined to silence, and paid more attention to the landscape than she did to the conversation, which was mostly about range conditions, and the scanty water supply, and the drought.  She was politely interested in Keith's ranch, and if she clung persistently to her society manner, why, her society manner was very pleasing, if somewhat unsatisfying to a fellow fairly drunk with her winsomeness. Keith showed her where she might look straight up the coulee to her brother's ranch, two miles away, and when she wished she might see what they were doing up there, he went in and got his field-glass. She thanked him prettily, and impersonally, and focused the glass upon Dick's house--which gave Keith another chance to look at her without being caught in the act.  “How plain everything is! I can see mama, out on the porch, and Miss Hayes.” She could also see Sir Redmond, who had just ridden up, and was talking to the ladies, but she did not think it necessary to mention him, for some reason; she kept her eyes to the glass, however, and appeared much absorbed. Dick rolled himself a cigarette and watched the two, and there was a twinkle in his eyes.  “I wonder--Dick, I do think--I'm afraid--” Beatrice hadn't her society manner now; she was her unaffected, girlish self; and she was growing excited.  “What's the matter?” Dick got up, and came and stood at her elbow.  “They're acting queerly. The maids are running about, and the cook is out, waving a large spoon, and mama has her arm around Miss Hayes, and Sir Redmond.”  “Let's see.” Dick took the glass and raised it to his eyes for a minute. “That's right,” he said. “They're making medicine over something. See what you make of it, Keith.”  Keith took the glass and looked through it. It was like a moving picture; one could see, but one wanted the interpretation of sound.  “We'd better ride over,” he said quietly. “Don't worry, Miss Lansell; it probably isn't anything serious. We can take the short cut up the coulee, and find out.” He put the glass into its leathern case and started to the gate, where the horses were standing. He did not tell Beatrice that Miss Hayes had just been carried into the house in a faint, or that her mother was behaving in an undignified fashion strongly suggesting hysterics. But Dick knew, from the look on his face, that it was serious. He hurried before them with long strides, leaving Beatrice, for the second time that morning, to the care of his neighbor.  So it was Keith who held his hand down for the delicious pressure of her foot, and arranged her habit with painstaking care, considering the hurry they were in. Dick was in the saddle, and gone, before Keith had finished, and Keith was not a slow young man, as a rule. They ran the two miles without a break, except twice, where there were gates to close. Dick, speeding a furlong before, had obligingly left them open; and a stockman is hard pressed indeed--or very drunk--when he fails to close his gates behind him. It is an unwritten law which becomes second nature.  Almost within sound of the place, Dick raced back and met them, and his face was white.  “It's Dorman!” he cried. “He's lost. They haven't seen him since we left. You know, Trix, he was standing at the gate.”  Beatrice went white as Dick; whiter, for she was untanned. An overwhelming sense of blame squeezed her heart tight. Keith, seeing her shoulders droop limply, reined close, to catch her in his arms if there was the slightest excuse. However, Beatrice was a healthy young woman, with splendid command of her nerves, and she had no intention of fainting. The sickening weakness passed in a moment.  “It's my fault,” she said, speaking rapidly, her eyes seeking Dick's for comfort. “I said 'yes' to everything he asked me, because I was thinking of something else, and not paying attention. He was going to buy your horse, Mr. Cameron, and now he's lost!”  This, though effective, was not particularly illuminating. Dick wanted details, and he got them--for Beatrice, having remorse to stir the dregs of memory, repeated nearly everything Dorman had said, even telling how the big, high pony put up his front hand, and he shaked it, and how Dorman truly needed some little wheels on his feet.  “Poor little devil,” Keith muttered, with wet eyes.  “He--he said you lived over there,” Beatrice finished, pointing, as Dorman had pointed--which was not toward the “Cross” ranch at all, but straight toward the river.  Keith wheeled Redcloud; there was no need to hear more. He took the hill at a pace which would have killed any horse but one bred to race over this rough country. Near the top, the forced breathing of another horse at his heels made him look behind. It was Beatrice following, her eyes like black stars. I do not know if Keith was astonished, but I do know that he was pleased.  “Where's Dick?” was all he said then.  “Dick's going to meet the men--the cowboys. Sir Redmond went after them, when they found Dorman wasn't anywhere about the place.”  Keith nodded understandingly, and slowed to let her come alongside.  “It's no use riding in bunches,” he remarked, after a little. “On circle we always go in pairs. We'll find him, all right.”  “We must,” said Beatrice, simply, and shaded her eyes with her hand. For they had reached the top, and the prairie land lay all about them and below, lazily asleep in the sunshine.  Keith halted and reached for his glass. “It's lucky I brought it along,”  he said. “I wasn't thinking, at the time; I just slung it over my shoulder from habit.”  “It's a good habit, I think,” she answered, trying to smile; but her lips would only quiver, for the thought of her blame tortured her. “Can you see--anything?” she ventured wistfully.  Keith shook his head, and continued his search. “There are so many little washouts and coulees, down there, you know. That's the trouble with a glass--it looks only on a level. But we'll find him. Don't you worry about that. He couldn't go far.”  “There isn't any real danger, is there?”  “Oh, no,” Keith said. “Except--” He bit his lip angrily.  “Except what?” she demanded. “I'm not silly, Mr. Cameron--tell me.”  Keith took the glass from his eyes, looked at her, and paid her the compliment of deciding to tell her, just as if she were a man.  “Nothing, only--he might run across a snake,” he said. “Rattlers.”  Beatrice drew her breath hard, but she was plucky. Keith thought he had never seen a pluckier girl, and the West can rightfully boast brave women.  She touched Rex with the whip. “Come,” she commanded. “We must not stand here. It has been more than three hours.”  Keith put away the glass, and shot ahead to guide her.  “We must have missed him, somewhere.” The eyes of Beatrice were heavy with the weariness born of anxiety and suspense. They stood at the very edge of the steep bluff which rimmed the river. “You don't think he could have--” Her eyes, shuddering down at the mocking, blue-gray ripples, finished the thought.  “He couldn't have got this far,” said Keith. “His legs would give out, climbing up and down. We'll go back by a little different way, and look.”  “There's something moving, off there.” Beatrice pointed with her whip.  “That's a coyote,” Keith told her; and then, seeing the look on her face: “They won't hurt any one. They're the rankest cowards on the range.”  “But the snakes--”  “Oh, well, he might wander around for a week, and not run across one. We won't borrow trouble, anyway.”  “No,” she agreed languidly. The sun was hot, and she had not had anything to eat since early breakfast, and the river mocked her parched throat with its cool glimmer below. She looked down at it wistfully, and Keith, watchful of every passing change in her face, led her back to where a cold, little spring crept from beneath a rock; there, lifting her down, he taught her how to drink from her hand.  For himself, he threw himself down, pushed back his hat, and drank long and leisurely. A brown lock of hair, clinging softly together with moisture, fell from his forehead and trailed in the clear water, and Beatrice felt oddly tempted to push it back where it belonged. Standing quietly watching his picturesque figure, she forgot, for the moment, that a little boy was lost among these peaceful, sunbathed hills; she remembered only the man at her feet, drinking long, satisfying drafts, while the lock of hair floated in the spring.  “Now we'll go on.” He stood up and pushed back the wet lock, which trickled a tiny stream down his cheek, and settled his gray hat in place.  Again that day he felt her foot in his palm, and the touch went over him in thrills. She was tired, he knew; her foot pressed heavier than it had before. He would have liked to take her in his arms and lift her bodily into the saddle, but he hardly dared think of such a blissful proceeding.  He set the pace slower, however, and avoided the steepest places, and he halted often on the higher ground, to scan sharply the coulees. And so they searched, these two, together, and grew to know each other better than in a month of casual meetings. And the grass nodded, and the winds laughed, and the stern hills looked on, quizzically silent. If they knew aught of a small boy with a wealth of yellow curls and white collar, they gave no sign, and the two rode on, always seeking hopefully.  A snake buzzed sharply on a gravelly slope, and Keith, sending Beatrice back a safe distance, took down his rope and gave battle, beating the sinister, gray-spotted coil with the loop until it straightened and was still. He dismounted then, and pinched off the rattles--nine, there were, and a “button”--and gave them to Beatrice, who handled them gingerly, and begged Keith to carry them for her. He slipped them into his pocket, and they went on, saying little.  Back near the ranch they met Dick and Sir Redmond. They exchanged sharp looks, and Dick shook his head.  “We haven't found him--yet. The boys are riding circle around the ranch; they're bound to find him, some of them, if we don't.”  “You had better go home,” Sir Redmond told her, with a note of authority in his voice which set Keith's teeth on edge. “You look done to death; this is men's work.”  Beatrice bit her lip, and barely glanced at him. “I'll go--when Dorman is found. What shall we do now, Dick?”  “Go down to the house and get some hot coffee, you two. We all snatched a bite to eat, and you need it. After that, you can look along the south side of the coulee, if you like.”  Beatrice obediently turned Rex toward home, and Keith followed. The ranch seemed very still and lonesome. Some chickens were rolling in the dust by the gate, and scattered, cackling indignantly, when they rode up. Off to the left a colt whinnied wistfully in a corral. Beatrice, riding listlessly to the house, stopped her horse with a jerk.  “I heard--where is he?”  Keith stopped Redcloud, and listened. Came a thumping noise, and a wail, not loud, but unmistakable.  “Aunt-ie!”  Beatrice was on the ground as soon as Keith, and together they ran to the place--the bunk-house. The thumping continued vigorously; evidently a small boy was kicking, with all his might, upon a closed door; it was not a new sound to the ears of Beatrice, since the arrival in America of her young nephew. Keith flung the door wide open, upsetting the small boy, who howled.  Beatrice swooped down upon him and gathered him so close she came near choking him. “You darling. Oh, Dorman!”  Dorman squirmed away from her. “I los' one shiny penny, Be'trice--and I couldn't open de door. Help me find my shiny penny.”  Keith picked him up and set him upon one square shoulder. “We'll take you up to your auntie, first thing, young man.”  “I want my one shiny penny. I want it!” Dorman showed symptoms of howling again.  “We'll come back and find it. Your auntie wants you now, and grandmama.”  Beatrice, following after, was treated to a rather unusual spectacle; that of a tall, sun-browned fellow, with fringed chaps and brightly gleaming spurs, racing down the path; upon his shoulder, the wriggling form of an extremely disreputable small boy, with cobwebs in his curls, and his once white collar a dirty rag streaming out behind.    CHAPTER 6. Mrs. Lansell's Lecture.   When the excitement had somewhat abated, and Miss Hayes was convinced that her idol was really there, safe, and with his usual healthy appetite, and when a messenger had been started out to recall the searchers, Dorman was placed upon a chair before a select and attentive audience, and invited to explain, which he did.  He had decided to borrow some little wheels from the bunkhouse, so he could ride his big, high pony home. Mr. Cameron had little wheels on his feet, and so did Uncle Dick, and all the mens. (The audience gravely nodded assent.) Well, and the knob wasn't too high when he went in, but when he tried to open the door to go out, it was away up there! (Dorman measured with his arm.) And he fell down, and all his shiny pennies rolled and rolled. And he looked and looked where they rolled, and when he counted, one was gone. So he looked and looked for the one shiny penny till he was tired to death. And so he climbed up high, into a funny bed on a shelf, and rested. And when he was rested he couldn't open the door, and he kicked and kicked, and then Be'trice came, and Mr. Cam'ron.  “And you said you'd help me find my one penny,” he reminded Keith, blinking solemnly at him from the chair. “And I want to shake hands wis your big, high pony. I'm going to buy him wis my six pennies. Be'trice said I could.”  Beatrice blushed, and Keith forgot where he was, for a minute, looking at her.  “Come and find my one shiny penny,” Dorman commanded, climbing down. “And I want Be'trice to come. Be'trice can always find things.”  “Beatrice cannot go,” said his grandmother, who didn't much like the way Keith hovered near Beatrice, nor the look in his eyes. “Beatrice is tired.”  “I want Be'trice!” Dorman set up his everyday howl, which started the dogs barking outside. His guardian angel attempted to soothe him, but he would have none of her; he only howled the louder, and kicked.  “There, there, honey, I'll go. Where's your hat?”  “Beatrice, you had better stay in the house; you have done quite enough for one day.” The tone of the mother suggested things.  “It is imperative,” said Beatrice, “for the peace and the well-being of this household, that Dorman find his penny without delay.” When Beatrice adopted that lofty tone her mother was in the habit of saying nothing--and biding her time. Beatrice was so apt, if mere loftiness did not carry the day, to go a step further and flatly refuse to obey. Mrs. Lansell preferred to yield, rather than be openly defied.  So the three went off to find the shiny penny--and in exactly thirty-five minutes they found it. I will not say that they could not have found it sooner, but, at any rate, they didn't, and they reached the house about two minutes behind Dick and Sir Redmond, which did not improve Sir Redmond's temper to speak of.  After that, Keith did not need much urging from Dick to spend the rest of the afternoon at the “Pool” ranch. When he wanted to, Keith could be very nice indeed to people; he went a long way, that afternoon, toward making a friend of Miss Hayes; but Mrs. Lansell, who was one of those women who adhere to the theory of First Impressions, in capitals, continued to regard him as an incipient outlaw, who would, in time and under favorable conditions, reveal his true character, and vindicate her keen insight into human nature. There was one thing which Mrs. Lansell never forgave Keith Cameron, and that was the ruin of her watch, which refused to run while she was in Montana.  That night, when Beatrice was just snuggling down into the delicious coolness of her pillow, she heard someone rap softly, but none the less imperatively, on her door. She opened one eye stealthily, to see her mother's pudgy form outlined in the feeble moonlight.  “Beatrice, are you asleep?”  Beatrice did not say yes, but she let her breath out carefully in a slumbrous sigh. It certainly sounded as if she were asleep.  “Be-atrice!” The tone, though guarded, was insistent.  The head of Beatrice moved slightly, and settled back into its little nest, for all the world like a dreaming, innocent baby.  If she had not been the mother of Beatrice, Mrs. Lansell would probably have gone back to her room, and continued to bide her time; but the mother of Beatrice had learned a few things about the ways of a wilful girl. She went in, and closed the door carefully behind her. She did not wish to keep the whole house awake. Then she went straight to the bed, laid hand upon a white shoulder that gleamed in the moonlight, and gave a shake.  “Beatrice, I want you to answer me when I speak.”  “M-m--did you--m-m--speak, mama?” Beatrice opened her eyes and closed them, opened them again for a minute longer, yawned daintily, and by these signs and tokens wandered back from dreamland obediently.  Her mother sat down upon the edge of the bed, and the bed creaked. Also, Beatrice groaned inwardly; the time of reckoning was verily drawing near. She promptly closed her eyes again, and gave a sleepy sigh.  “Beatrice, did you refuse Sir Redmond again?”  “M-m--were you speaking--mama?”  Mrs. Lansell, endeavoring to keep her temper, repeated the question.  Beatrice began to feel that she was an abused girl. She lifted herself to her elbow, and thumped the pillow spitefully.  “Again? Dear me, mama! I've never refused him once!”  “You haven't accepted him once, either,” her mother retorted; and Beatrice lay down again.  “I do wish, Beatrice, you would look at the matter in a sensible light I'm sure I never would ask you to marry a man you could not care for. But Sir Redmond is young, and good-looking, and has birth and breeding, and money--no one can accuse him of being a fortune-hunter, I'm sure. I was asking Richard to-day, and he says Sir Redmond holds a large interest in the Northern Pool, and other English investors pay him a salary, besides, to look after their interests. I wouldn't be surprised if the holdings of both of you would be sufficient to control the business.”  Beatrice, not caring anything for business anyway, said nothing.  “Any one can see the man's crazy for you. His sister says he never cared for a woman before in his life.”  “Of course,” put in Beatrice sarcastically. “His sister followed him down to South Africa, and all around, and is in a position to know.”  “Any one can see he isn't a lady's man.”  “No--” Beatrice smiled reminiscently; “he certainly isn't.”  “And so he's in deadly earnest. And I'm positive he will make you a model husband.”  “Only think of having to live, all one's life, with a model husband!”  shuddered Beatrice hypocritically.  “Be-atrice! And then, it's something to marry a title.”  “That's the worst of it,” remarked Beatrice.  “Any other girl in America would jump at the chance. I do believe, Beatrice, you are hanging back just to be aggravating. And there's another thing, Beatrice. I don't approve of the way this Keith Cameron hangs around you.”  “He doesn't!” denied Beatrice, in an altogether different tone. “Why, mama!”  “I don't approve of flirting, Beatrice, and you know it. The way you gadded around over the hills with him--a perfect stranger--was disgraceful; perfectly disgraceful. You don't know any thing about the fellow, whether he's a fit companion or not--a wild, uncouth cowboy--”  “He graduated from Yale, a year after Dick. And he was halfback, too.”  “That doesn't signify,” said her mother, “a particle. I know Miss Hayes was dreadfully shocked to see you come riding up with him, and Sir Redmond forced to go with Richard, or ride alone.”  “Dick is good company,” said Beatrice. “And it was his own fault. I asked him to go with us, when Dick and I left the cattle, and he wouldn't. Dick will tell you the same. And after that I did not see him until just before we--I came home, Really, mama, I can't have a leading-string on Sir Redmond. If he refuses to come with me, I can hardly insist.”  “Well, you must have done something. You said something, or did something, to make him very angry. He has not been himself all day. What did you say?”  “Dear me, mama, I am not responsible for all Sir Redmond's ill-humor.”  “I did not ask you that, Beatrice.”  Beatrice thumped her pillow again. “I don't remember anything very dreadful, mama. I--I think he has indigestion.”  “Be-atrice! I do wish you would try to conquer that habit of flippancy. It is not ladylike. And I warn you, Sir Redmond is not the man to dangle after you forever. He will lose patience, and go back to England without you--and serve you right! I am only talking for your own good, Beatrice. I am not at all sure that you want him to leave you alone.”  Beatrice was not at all sure, either. She lay still, and wished her mother would stop talking for her good. Talking for her good had meant, as far back as Beatrice could remember, saying disagreeable things in a disagreeable manner.  “And remember, Beatrice, I want this flirting stopped.”  “Flirting, mama?” To hear the girl, you would think she had never heard the word before.  “That's what I said, Beatrice. I shall speak to Richard in the morning about this fellow Cameron. He must put a stop to his being here two-thirds of the time. It is unendurable.”  “He and Dick are chums, mama, and have been for years. And to-morrow we are going to Lost Canyon, you know, and Mr. Cameron is to go along. And there are several other trips, mama, to which he is already invited. Dick cannot recall those invitations.”  “Well, it must end there. Richard must do something. I cannot see what he finds about the fellow to like--or you, either, Beatrice. Just because he rides like a--a wild Indian, and has a certain daredevil way--”  “I never said I liked him, mama,” Beatrice protested, somewhat hastily. “I--of course, I try to treat him well--”  “I should say you did!” exploded her mother angrily. “You would be much better employed in trying to treat Sir Redmond half as well. It is positively disgraceful, the way you behave toward him--as fine a man as I ever met in my life. I warn you, Beatrice, you must have more regard for propriety, or I shall take you back to New York at once. I certainly shall.”  With that threat, which she shrewdly guessed would go far toward bringing this wayward girl to time, Mrs. Lansell got up off the bed, which creaked its relief, and groped her way to her own room.  The pillow of Beatrice received considerable thumping during the next hour--a great deal more, in fact, than it needed. Two thoughts troubled her more than she liked. What if her mother was right, and Sir Redmond lost patience with her and went home? That possibility was unpleasant, to say the least. Again, would he give her up altogether if she showed Dick she was not afraid of Keith Cameron, for all his good looks, and at the same time taught that young man a much-needed lesson? The way he had stared at her was nothing less than a challenge and Beatrice was sorely tempted.    CHAPTER 7. Beatrice's Wild Ride.   “Well, are we all ready?” Dick gathered up his reins, and took critical inventory of the load. His mother peered under the front seat to be doubly sure that there were at least four umbrellas and her waterproof raglan in the rig; Mrs. Lansell did not propose to be caught unawares in a storm another time. Miss Hayes straightened Dorman's cap, and told him to sit down, dear, and then called upon Sir Redmond to enforce the command. Sir Redmond repeated her command, minus the dear, and then rode on ahead to overtake Beatrice and Keith, who had started. Dick climbed up over the front wheel, released the brake, chirped at the horses, and they were off for Lost Canyon.  Beatrice was behaving beautifully, and her mother only hoped to heaven it would last the day out; perhaps Sir Redmond would be able to extract some sort of a promise from her in that mood, Mrs. Lansell reflected, as she watched Beatrice chatting to her two cavaliers, with the most decorous impartiality. Sir Redmond seemed in high spirits, which argued well; Mrs. Lansell gave herself up to the pleasure of the drive with a heart free from anxiety. Not only was Beatrice at her best; Dorman's mood was nothing short of angelic, and as the weather was simply perfect, the day surely promised well.  For a mile Keith had showed signs of a mind not at ease, and at last he made bold to speak.  “I thought Rex was to be your saddle-horse?” he said abruptly to Beatrice.  “He was; but when Dick brought Goldie home, last night, I fell in love with him on sight, and just teased Dick till he told me I might have him to ride.”  “I thought Dick had some sense,” Keith said gloomily.  “He has. He knew there would be no peace till he surrendered.”  “I didn't know you were going to ride him, when I sold him to Dick. He's not safe for a woman.”  “Does he buck, Mr. Cameron? Dick said he was gentle.” Beatrice had seen a horse buck, one day, and had a wholesome fear of that form of equine amusement.  “Oh, no. I never knew him to.”  “Then I don't mind anything else. I'm accustomed to horses,” said Beatrice, and smiled welcome to Sir Redmond, who came up with them at that moment.  “You want to ride him with a light rein,” Keith cautioned, clinging to the subject. “He's tenderbitted, and nervous. He won't stand for any jerking, you see.”  “I never jerk, Mr. Cameron.” Keith discovered that big, baffling, blue-brown eyes can, if they wish, rival liquid air for coldness. “I rode horses before I came to Montana.”  Of course, when a man gets frozen with a girl's eyes, and scorched with a girl's sarcasm, the thing for him to do is to retreat until the atmosphere becomes normal. Keith fell behind just as soon as he could do so with some show of dignity, and for several miles tried to convince himself that he would rather talk to Dick and “the old maid” than not.  “Don't you know,” Sir Redmond remarked sympathetically, “some of these Western fellows are inclined to be deuced officious and impertinent.”  Sir Redmond got a taste of the freezing process that made him change the subject abruptly.  The way was rough and lonely; the trail wound over sharp-nosed hills and through deep, narrow coulees, with occasional, tantalizing glimpses of the river and the open land beyond, that kept Beatrice in a fever of enthusiasm. From riding blithely ahead, she took to lagging far behind with her kodak, getting snap-shots of the choicest bits of scenery.  “Another cartridge, please, Sir Redmond,” she said, and wound industriously on the finished roll.  “It's a jolly good thing I brought my pockets full.” Sir Redmond fished one out for her. “Was that a dozen?”  “No; that had only six films. I want a larger one this time. It is a perfect nuisance to stop and change. Be still, Goldie!”  “We're getting rather a long way behind--but I fancy the road is plain.”  “We'll hurry and overtake them. I won't take any more pictures.”  “Until you chance upon something you can't resist. I understand all that, you know.” Sir Redmond, while he teased, was pondering whether this was an auspicious time and place to ask Beatrice to marry him. He had tried so many times and places that seemed auspicious, that the man was growing fearful. It is not pleasant to have a girl smile indulgently upon you and deftly turn your avowals aside, so that they fall flat.  “I'm ready,” she announced, blind to what his eyes were saying.  “Shall we trek?” Sir Redmond sighed a bit. He was not anxious to overtake the others.  “We will. Only, out here people never 'trek,' Sir Redmond. They 'hit the trail'.”  “So they do. And the way these cowboys do it, one would think they were couriers, by Jove! with the lives of a whole army at stake. So I fancy we had better hit the trail, eh?”  “You're learning,” Beatrice assured him, as they started on. “A year out here, and you would be a real American, Sir Redmond.”  Sir Redmond came near saying, “The Lord forbid!” but he thought better of it. Beatrice was intensely loyal to her countrymen, unfortunately, and would certainly resent such a remark; but, for all that, he thought it.  For a mile or two she held to her resolve, and then, at the top of a long hill overlooking the canyon where they were to eat their lunch, out came her kodak again.  “This must be Lost Canyon, for Dick has stopped by those trees. I want to get just one view from here. Steady, Goldie! Dear me, this horse does detest standing still!”  “I fancy he is anxious to get down with the others. Let me hold him for you. Whoa, there!” He put a hand upon the bridle, a familiarity Goldie resented. He snorted and dodged backward, to the ruin of the picture Beatrice was endeavoring to get.  “Now you've frightened him. Whoa, pet! It's of no use to try; he won't stand.”  “Let me have your camera. He's getting rather an ugly temper, I think.”  Sir Redmond put out his hand again, and again Goldie dodged backward.  “I can do better alone, Sir Redmond.” The cheeks of Beatrice were red. She managed to hold the horse in until her kodak was put safely in its case, but her temper, as well as Goldie's, was roughened. She hated spoiling a film, which she was perfectly sure she had done.  Goldie felt the sting of her whip when she brought him back into the road, and, from merely fretting, he took to plunging angrily. Then, when Beatrice pulled him up sharply, he thrust out his nose, grabbed the bit in his teeth, and bolted down the hill, past all control.  “Good God, hold him!” shouted Sir Redmond, putting his horse to a run.  The advice was good, and Beatrice heard it plainly enough, but she neither answered nor looked back. How, she thought, resentfully, was one to hold a yellow streak of rage, with legs like wire springs and a neck of iron? Besides, she was angrily alive to the fact that Keith Cameron, watching down below, was having his revenge. She wondered if he was enjoying it.  He was not. Goldie, when he ran, ran blindly in a straight line, and Keith knew it. He also knew that the Englishman couldn't keep within gunshot of Goldie, with the mount he had, and half a mile away--Keith shut his teeth hard together, and went out to meet her. Redcloud lay along the ground in great leaps, but Keith, bending low over his neck, urged him faster and faster, until the horse, his ears laid close against his neck, did the best there was in him. From the tail of his eye, Keith saw Sir Redmond's horse go down upon his knees, and get up limping--and the sight filled him with ungenerous gladness; Sir Redmond was out of the race. It was Keith and Redcloud--they two; and Keith could smile over it.  He saw Beatrice's hat loosen and lift in front, flop uncertainly, and then go sailing away into the sage-brush, and he noted where it fell, that he might find it, later. Then he was close enough to see her face, and wondered that there was so little fear written there. Beatrice was plucky, and she rode well, her weight upon the bit; but her weight was nothing to the clinched teeth of the horse; and, though she had known it from the start, she was scarcely frightened. There was a good deal of the daredevil in Beatrice; she trusted a great deal to blind luck.  Just there the land was level, and she hoped to check him on the slope of the hill before them. She did not know it was moated like a castle, with a washout ten feet deep and twice that in width, and that what looked to her quite easy was utterly impossible.  Keith gained, every leap. In a moment he was close behind.  “Take your foot out of the stirrup,” he commanded, harshly, and though Beatrice wondered why, something in his voice made her obey.  Now Redcloud's nose was even with her elbow; the breath from his wide-flaring nostrils rose hotly in her face. Another bound, and he had forged ahead, neck and neck with Goldie, and it was Keith by her side, keen-eyed and calm.  “Let go all hold,” he said. Reaching suddenly, he caught her around the waist and pulled her from the saddle, just as Redcloud, scenting danger, plowed his front feet deeply into the loose soil and stopped dead still.  It was neatly done, and quickly; so quickly that before Beatrice had more than gasped her surprise, Keith lowered her to the ground and slid out of the saddle. Beatrice looked at him, and wondered at his face, and at the way he was shaking. He leaned weakly against the horse and hid his face on his arm, and trembled at what had come so close to the girl--the girl, who stood there panting a little, with her wonderful, waving hair cloaking her almost to her knees, and her blue-brown eyes wide and bright, and full of a deep amazement. She forgot Goldie, and did not even look to see what had become of him; she forgot nearly everything, just then, in wonder at this tall, clean-built young fellow, who never had seemed to care what happened, leaning there with his face hidden, his hat far hack on his head and little drops standing thickly upon his forehead. She waited a moment, and when he did not move, her thoughts drifted to other things.  “I wonder,” she said abstractedly, “if I broke my kodak.”  Keith lifted his head and looked at her. “Your kodak--good Lord!” He looked hard into her eyes, and she returned the stare.  “Come here,” he commanded, hoarsely, catching her arm. “Your kodak! Look down there!” He led her to the brink, which was close enough to set him shuddering anew. “Look! There's Goldie, damn him! It's a wonder he's on his feet; I thought he'd be dead--and serve him right. And you--you wonder if you broke your kodak!”  Beatrice drew back from him, and from the sight below, and if she were frightened, she tried not to let him see. “Should I have fainted?”  She was proud of the steadiness of her voice. “Really, I am very much obliged to you, Mr. Cameron, for saving me from an ugly fall. You did it very neatly, I imagine, and I am grateful. Still, I really hope I didn't break my kodak. Are you very disappointed because I can't faint away? There doesn't seem to be any brook close by, you see--and I haven't my er--lover's arms to fall into. Those are the regulation stage settings, I believe, and--”  “Don't worry, Miss Lansell. I didn't expect you to faint, or to show any human feelings whatever. I do pity your horse, though.”  “You didn't a minute ago,” she reminded him. “You indulged in a bit of profanity, if I remember.”  “For which I beg Goldie's pardon,” he retorted, his eyes unsmiling.  “And mine, I hope.”  “Certainly.”  “I think it's rather absurd to stand here sparring, Mr. Cameron. You'll begin to accuse me of ingratitude, and I'm as grateful as possible for what you did. Sir Redmond's horse was too slow to keep up, or he would have been at hand, no doubt.”  “And could have supplied part of the stage setting. Too bad he was behind.” Keith turned and readjusted the cinch on his saddle, though it was not loose enough to matter, and before he had finished Sir Redmond rode up.  “Are you hurt, Beatrice?” His face was pale, and his eyes anxious.  “Not at all. Mr. Cameron kindly helped me from the saddle in time to prevent an accident. I wish you'd thank him, Sir Redmond. I haven't the words.”  “You needn't trouble,” said Keith hastily, getting into the saddle. “I'll go down after Goldie. You can easily find the camp, I guess, without a pilot.” Then he galloped away and left them, and would not look back; if he had done so, he would have seen Beatrice's eyes following him remorsefully. Also, he would have seen Sir Redmond glare after him jealously; for Sir Redmond was not in a position to know that their tete-a-tete had not been a pleasant one, and no man likes to have another fellow save the life of a woman he loves, while he himself is limping painfully up from the rear.  However, the woman he loved was very gracious to him that day, and for many days, and Keith Cameron held himself aloof during the rest of the trip, which should have contented Sir Redmond.    CHAPTER 8. Dorman Plays Cupid.   Dorman toiled up the steps, his straw hat perilously near to slipping down his back, his face like a large, red beet, and his hands vainly trying to reach around a baking-powder can which the Chinaman cook had given him.  He marched straight to where Beatrice was lying in the hammock. If she had been older, or younger, or a plain young woman, one might say that Beatrice was sulking in the hammock, for she had not spoken anything but “yes” and “no” to her mother for an hour, and she had only spoken those two words occasionally, when duty demanded it. For one thing, Sir Redmond was absent, and had been for two weeks, and Beatrice was beginning to miss him dreadfully. To beguile the time, she had ridden, every day, long miles into the hills. Three times she had met Keith Cameron, also riding alone in the hills, and she had endeavored to amuse herself with him, after her own inimitable fashion, and with more or less success. The trouble was, that sometimes Keith seemed to be amusing himself with her, which was not pleasing to a girl like Beatrice. At any rate, he proved himself quite able to play the game of Give and Take, so that the conscience of Beatrice was at ease; no one could call her pastime a slaughter of the innocents, surely, when the fellow stood his ground like that. It was more a fencing-bout, and Beatrice enjoyed it very much; she told herself that the reason she enjoyed talking with Keith was because he was not always getting hurt, like Sir Redmond--or, if he did, he kept his feelings to himself, and went boldly on with the game. Item: Beatrice had reversed her decision that Keith was vain, though she still felt tempted, at times, to resort to “making faces”--when she was worsted, that was.  To return to this particular day of sulking; Rex had cast a shoe, and lamed himself just enough to prevent her riding, and so Beatrice was having a dull day of it in the house. Besides, her mother had just finished talking to her for her good, which was enough to send an angel into the sulks--and Beatrice lacked a good deal of being an angel.  Dorman laid his baking-powder can confidingly in his divinity's lap. “Be'trice, I did get some grasshoppers; you said I couldn't. And you wouldn't go fishin', 'cause you didn't like to take Uncle Dick's make-m'lieve flies, so I got some really ones, Be'trice, that'll wiggle dere own self.”  “Oh, dear me! It's too hot, Dorman.”  “'Tisn't, Be'trice It's dest as cool--and by de brook it's awf-lly cold. Come, Be'trice!” He pulled at the smart little pink ruffles on her skirt.  “I'm too sleepy, hon.”  “You can sleep by de brook, Be'trice. I'll let you,” he promised generously, “'cept when I need anudder grasshopper; nen I'll wake you up.”  “Wait till to-morrow. I don't believe the fish are hungry to-day. Don't tear my skirt to pieces, Dorman!”  Dorman began to whine. He had never found his divinity in so unlovely a mood. “I want to go now! Dey are too hungry, Be'trice! Looey Sam is goin' to fry my fishes for dinner, to s'prise auntie. Come, Be'trice!”  “Why don't you go with the child, Beatrice? You grow more selfish every day.” Mrs. Lansell could not endure selfishness--in others. “You know he will not give us any peace until you do.”  Dorman instantly proceeded to make good his grandmother's prophecy, and wept so that one could hear him a mile.  “Oh, dear me! Be still, Dorman--your auntie has a headache. Well, get your rod, if you know where it is--which I doubt.” Beatrice flounced out of the hammock and got her hat, one of those floppy white things, fluffed with thin, white stuff, till they look like nothing so much as a wisp of cloud, with ribbons to moor it to her head and keep it from sailing off to join its brothers in the sky.  Down by the creek, where the willows nodded to their own reflections in the still places, it was cool and sweet scented, and Beatrice forgot her grievances, and was not sorry she had come.  (It was at about this time that a tall young fellow, two miles down the coulee, put away his field glass and went off to saddle his horse.)  “Don't run ahead so, Dorman,” Beatrice cautioned. To her had been given the doubtful honor of carrying the baking-powder can of grasshoppers. Even divinities must make themselves useful to man.  “Why, Be'trice?” Dorman swished his rod in unpleasant proximity to his divinity's head.  “Because, honey”--Beatrice dodged--“you might step on a snake, a rattlesnake, that would bite you.”  “How would it bite, Be'trice?”  “With its teeth, of course; long, wicked teeth, with poison on them.”  “I saw one when I was ridin' on a horse wis Uncle Dick. It kept windin' up till it was round, and it growled wis its tail, Be'trice. And Uncle Dick chased it, and nen it unwinded itself and creeped under a big rock. It didn't bite once--and I didn't see any teeth to it.”  “Carry your rod still, Dorman. Are you trying to knock my hat off my head? Rattlesnakes have teeth, hon, whether you saw them or not. I saw a great, long one that day we thought you were lost. Mr. Cameron killed it with his rope. I'm sure it had teeth.”  “Did it growl, Be'trice? Tell me how it went.”  “Like this, hon.” Beatrice parted her lips ever so little, and a snake buzzed at Dorman's feet. He gave a yell of terror, and backed ingloriously.  “You see, honey, if that had been really a snake, it would have bitten you. Never mind, dear--it was only I.”  Dorman was some time believing this astonishing statement. “How did you growl by my feet, Be'trice? Show me again.”  Beatrice, who had learned some things at school which were not included in the curriculum, repeated the performance, while Dorman watched her with eyes and mouth at their widest. Like some older members of his sex, he was discovering new witcheries about his divinity every day.  “Well, Be'trice!” He gave a long gasp of ecstasy. “I don't see how can you do it? Can't I do it, Be'trice?”  “I'm afraid not, honey--you'd have to learn. There was a queer French girl at school, who could do the strangest things, Dorman--like fairy tales, almost. And she taught me to throw my voice different places, and mimic sounds, when we should have been at our lessons. Listen, hon. This is how a little lamb cries, when he is lost.... And this is what a hungry kittie says, when she is away up in a tree, and is afraid to come down.”  Dorman danced all around his divinity, and forgot about the fish--until Beatrice found it in her heart to regret her rash revelation of hitherto undreamed-of powers of entertainment.  “Not another sound, Dorman,” she declared at length, with the firmness of despair. “No, I will not be a lost lamb another once. No, nor a hungry kittie, either--nor a snake, or anything. If you are not going to fish, I shall go straight back to the house.”  Dorman sighed heavily, and permitted his divinity to fasten a small grasshopper to his hook.  “We'll go a bit farther, dear, down under those great trees. And you must not speak a word, remember, or the fish will all run away.”  When she had settled him in a likely place, and the rapt patience of the born angler had folded him close, she disposed herself comfortably in the thick grass, her back against a tree, and took up the shuttle of fancy to weave a wonderful daydream, as beautiful, intangible as the lacy, summer clouds over her head.  A man rode quietly over the grass and stopped two rods away, that he might fill his hungry eyes with the delicious loveliness of his Heart's Desire.  “Got a bite yet?”  Dorman turned and wrinkled his nose, by way of welcome, and shook his head vaguely, as though he might tell of several unimportant nibbles, if it were worth the effort.  Beatrice sat a bit straighter, and dexterously whisked some pink ruffles down over two distracting ankles, and hoped Keith had not taken notice of them. He had, though; trust a man for that!  Keith dismounted, dropped the reins to the ground, and came and laid himself down in the grass beside his Heart's Desire, and Beatrice noticed how tall he was, and slim and strong.  “How did you know we were here?” she wanted to know, with lifted eyebrows.  Keith wondered if there was a welcome behind that sweet, indifferent face. He never could be sure of anything in Beatrice's face, because it never was alike twice, it seemed to him--and if it spoke welcome for a second, the next there was only raillery, or something equally unsatisfying.  “I saw you from the trail,” he answered promptly, evidently not thinking it wise to mention the fieldglass. And then: “Is Dick at home?” Not that he wanted Dick--but a fellow, even when he is in the last stages of love, feels need of an excuse sometimes.  “No--we women are alone to-day. There isn't a man on the place, except Looey Sam, and he doesn't count.”  Dorman squirmed around till he could look at the two, and his eyebrows were tied in a knot. “I wish, Be'trice, you wouldn't talk, 'less you whisper. De fishes won't bite a bit.”  “All right, honey--we won't.”  Dorman turned back to his fishing with a long breath of relief. His divinity never broke a promise, if she could help it.  If Dorman Hayes had been Cupid himself, he could not have hit upon a more impish arrangement than that. To place a girl like Beatrice beside a fellow like Keith--a fellow who is tall, and browned, and extremely good-looking, and who has hazel eyes with a laugh in them always--a fellow, moreover, who is very much in love and very much in earnest about it--and condemn him to silence, or to whispers!  Keith took advantage of the edict, and moved closer, so that he could whisper in comfort--and be nearer his Heart's Desire. He lay with his head propped upon his hand, and his elbow digging into the sod and getting grass-stains on his shirt sleeve, for the day was too warm for a coat. Beatrice, looking down at him, observed that his forearm, between his glove and wrist-band, was as white and smooth as her own. It is characteristic of a cowboy to have a face brown