Note from electronic text creator: I have compiled a word list with definitions of most of the Scottish words found in this work at the end of the book.  This list does not belong to the original work, but is designed to help with the conversations in broad Scots found in this work.  A further explanation of this list can be found towards the end of this document, preceding the word list.  There are two footnotes in this book which have been renumbered and placed at the end of the work.      DAVID ELGINBROD.  By George Macdonald, LL.D.     And gladly wolde he lerne and gladly teche.  CHAUCER.     TO THE MEMORY OF LADY NOEL BYRON, THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED, WITH A LOVE STRONGER THAN DEATH.     BOOK I.   TURRIEPUFFIT.   With him there was a Ploughman, was his brother.  A trewé swinker, and a good was he, Living in peace and perfect charity. God loved he best with all his trewé heart, At allé timés, were it gain or smart, And then his neighébour right as himselve.  CHAUCER.--Prologue to the Canterbury Tales.     CHAPTER I.  THE FIR-WOOD.       Of all the flowers in the mead, Then love I roost these flowers white and rede, Such that men callen daisies in our town.       I renne blithe As soon as ever the sun ginneth west, To see this flower, how it will go to rest, For fear of night, so hateth she darkness; Her cheer is plainly spread in the brightness Of the sunne, for there it will unclose.  CHAUCER--Prologue to the Legend of Good Women.   “Meg! whaur are ye gaein' that get, like a wull shuttle?  Come in to the beuk.”  Meg's mother stood at the cottage door, with arms akimbo and clouded brow, calling through the boles of a little forest of fir-trees after her daughter.  One would naturally presume that the phrase she employed, comparing her daughter's motions to those of a shuttle that had “gane wull,” or lost its way, implied that she was watching her as she threaded her way through the trees.  But although she could not see her, the fir-wood was certainly the likeliest place for her daughter to be in; and the figure she employed was not in the least inapplicable to Meg's usual mode of wandering through the trees, that operation being commonly performed in the most erratic manner possible.  It was the ordinary occupation of the first hour of almost every day of Margaret's life.  As soon as she woke in the morning, the fir-wood drew her towards it, and she rose and went. Through its crowd of slender pillars, she strayed hither and thither, in an aimless manner, as if resignedly haunting the neighbourhood of something she had lost, or, hopefully, that of a treasure she expected one day to find.  It did not seem that she had heard her mother's call, for no response followed; and Janet Elginbrod returned into the cottage, where David of the same surname, who was already seated at the white deal table with “the beuk,” or large family bible before him, straightway commenced reading a chapter in the usual routine from the Old Testament, the New being reserved for the evening devotions. The chapter was the fortieth of the prophet Isaiah; and as the voice of the reader re-uttered the words of old inspiration, one might have thought that it was the voice of the ancient prophet himself, pouring forth the expression of his own faith in his expostulations with the unbelief of his brethren.  The chapter finished--it is none of the shortest, and Meg had not yet returned--the two knelt, and David prayed thus:  “O Thou who holdest the waters in the hollow of ae han', and carriest the lambs o' thy own making in thy bosom with the other han', it would be altogether unworthy o' thee, and o' thy Maijesty o' love, to require o' us that which thou knowest we cannot bring unto thee, until thou enrich us with that same.  Therefore, like thine own bairns, we boo doon afore thee, an' pray that thou wouldst tak' thy wull o' us, thy holy an' perfect an' blessed wull o' us; for, O God, we are a' thine ain.  An' for oor lassie, wha's oot amo' thy trees, an' wha' we dinna think forgets her Maker, though she may whiles forget her prayers, Lord, keep her a bonnie lassie in thy sicht, as white and clean in thy een as she is fair an' halesome in oors; an' oh! we thank thee, Father in heaven, for giein' her to us. An' noo, for a' oor wrang-duins an' ill-min'ins, for a' oor sins and trespasses o' mony sorts, dinna forget them, O God, till thou pits them a' richt, an' syne exerceese thy michty power e'en ower thine ain sel, an' clean forget them a'thegither; cast them ahint thy back, whaur e'en thine ain een shall ne'er see them again, that we may walk bold an' upricht afore thee for evermore, an' see the face o' Him wha was as muckle God in doin' thy biddin', as gin he had been ordering' a' thing Himsel.  For his sake, Ahmen.”  I hope my readers will not suppose that I give this as a specimen of Scotch prayers.  I know better than that.  David was an unusual man, and his prayers were unusual prayers.  The present was a little more so in its style, from the fact that one of the subjects of it was absent, a circumstance that rarely happened.  But the degree of difference was too small to be detected by any but those who were quite accustomed to his forms of thought and expression.  How much of it Janet understood or sympathized with, it is difficult to say; for anything that could be called a thought rarely crossed the threshold of her utterance.  On this occasion, the moment the prayer was ended, she rose from her knees, smoothed down her check apron, and went to the door; where, shading her eyes from the sun with her hand, she peered from under its penthouse into the fir-wood, and said in a voice softened apparently by the exercise in which she had taken a silent share.  “Whaur can the lassie be?”  And where was the lassie?  In the fir-wood, to be sure, with the thousand shadows, and the sunlight through it all; for at this moment the light fell upon her far in its depths, and revealed her hastening towards the cottage in as straight a line as the trees would permit, now blotted out by a crossing shadow, and anon radiant in the sunlight, appearing and vanishing as she threaded the upright warp of the fir-wood.  It was morning all around her; and one might see that it was morning within her too, as, emerging at last in the small open space around the cottage, Margaret--I cannot call her Meg, although her mother does--her father always called her “Maggy, my doo,” Anglicé, dove--Margaret approached her mother with a bright healthful face, and the least possible expression of uneasiness on her fair forehead.  She carried a book in her hand.  “What gars ye gang stravaguin' that get, Meg, whan ye ken weel eneuch ye sud a' been in to worship lang syne?  An sae we maun hae worship our lanes for want o' you, ye hizzy!”  “I didna ken it was sae late, mither,” replied Margaret, in a submissive tone, musical in spite of the rugged dialect into which the sounds were fashioned.  “Nae dout!  Ye had yer brakfast, an' ye warna that hungry for the word.  But here comes yer father, and ye'll no mend for his flytin', I'se promise.”  “Hoots! lat the bairn alane, Janet, my woman.  The word'll be mair to her afore lang.”  “I wat she has a word o' her nain there.  What beuk hae ye gotten there, Meg?  Whaur got ye't?”  Had it not been for the handsome binding of the book in her daughter's hand, it would neither have caught the eye, nor roused the suspicions of Janet.  David glanced at the book in his turn, and a faint expression of surprise, embodied chiefly in the opening of his eyelids a little wider than usual, crossed his face.  But he only said with a smile:  “I didna ken that the tree o' knowledge, wi' sic fair fruit, grew in our wud, Maggy, my doo.”  “Whaur gat ye the beuk?” reiterated Janet.  Margaret's face was by this time the colour of the crimson boards of the volume in her hand, but she replied at once:  “I got it frae Maister Sutherlan', I reckon.”  Janet's first response was an inverted whistle; her next, another question:  “Maister Sutherlan'! wha's that o't?”  “Hoot, lass!” interposed David, “ye ken weel aneuch.  It's the new tutor lad, up at the hoose; a fine, douce, honest chield, an' weel-faured, forby.  Lat's see the bit beuky, lassie.”  Margaret handed it to her father.  “Col-e-ridge's Poems,” read David, with some difficulty.  “Tak' it hame direckly,” said Janet.  “Na, na,” said David; “a' the apples o' the tree o' knowledge are no stappit wi sut an stew; an' gin this ane be, she'll sune ken by the taste o't what's comin'.  It's no muckle o' an ill beuk 'at ye'll read, Maggy, my doo.”  “Guid preserve's, man!  I'm no sayin' it's an ill beuk.  But it's no richt to mak appintments wi' stranger lads i' the wud sae ear' i' the mornin'.  Is't noo, yersel, Meg?”  “Mither! mither!” said Margaret, and her eyes flashed through the watery veil that tried to hide them, “hoo can ye?  Ye ken yersel I had nae appintment wi' him or ony man.”  “Weel, weel!” said Janet; and, apparently either satisfied with or overcome by the emotion she had excited, she turned and went in to pursue her usual house-avocations; while David, handing the book to his daughter, went away down the path that led from the cottage door, in the direction of a road to be seen at a little distance through the trees, which surrounded the cottage on all sides. Margaret followed her mother into the cottage, and was soon as busy as she with her share of the duties of the household; but it was a good many minutes before the cloud caused by her mother's hasty words entirely disappeared from a forehead which might with especial justice be called the sky of her face.  Meantime David emerged upon the more open road, and bent his course, still through fir-trees, towards a house for whose sake alone the road seemed to have been constructed.     CHAPTER II.  DAVID ELGINBROD AND THE NEW TUTOR.       Concord between our wit and will Where highest notes to godliness are raised, And lowest sink not down to jot of ill.  What Languetus taught Sir Philip Sidney.   THE ARCADIA--Third Eclogue.   The House of Turriepuffit stood about a furlong from David's cottage.  It was the abode of the Laird, or landed proprietor, in whose employment David filled several offices ordinarily distinct. The estate was a small one, and almost entirely farmed by the owner himself; who, with David's help, managed to turn it to good account. Upon week-days, he appeared on horseback in a costume more fitted for following the plough; but he did not work with his own hands; and on Sundays was at once recognizable as a country gentleman.  David was his bailiff or grieve, to overlook the labourers on the estate; his steward to pay them, and keep the farm accounts; his head gardener--for little labour was expended in that direction, there being only one lady, the mistress of the house, and she no patroness of useless flowers: David was in fact the laird's general adviser and executor.  The laird's family, besides the lady already mentioned, consisted only of two boys, of the ages of eleven and fourteen, whom he wished to enjoy the same privileges he had himself possessed, and to whom, therefore, he was giving a classical and mathematical education, in view of the University, by means of private tutors; the last of whom--for the changes were not few, seeing the salary was of the smallest--was Hugh Sutherland, the young man concerning whom David Elginbrod has already given his opinion.  But notwithstanding the freedom he always granted his daughter, and his good opinion of Hugh as well, David could not help feeling a little anxious, in his walk along the road towards the house, as to what the apparent acquaintance between her and the new tutor might evolve; but he got rid of all the difficulty, as far as he was concerned, by saying at last:  “What richt hae I to interfere? even supposin' I wanted to interfere.  But I can lippen weel to my bonny doo; an' for the rest, she maun tak' her chance like the lave o's.  An' wha' kens but it micht jist be stan'in' afore Him, i' the very get that He meant to gang.  The Lord forgie me for speakin' o' chance, as gin I believed in ony sic havers.  There's no fear o' the lassie.  Gude mornin' t'ye, Maister Sutherlan'.  That's a braw beuk o' ballants ye gae the len' o' to my Maggy, this mornin', sir.”  Sutherland was just entering a side-door of the house when David accosted him.  He was not old enough to keep from blushing at David's words; but, having a good conscience, he was ready with a good answer.  “It's a good book, Mr. Elginbrod.  It will do her no harm, though it be ballads.”  “I'm in no dreed o' that, sir.  Bairns maun hae ballants.  An', to tell the truth, sir, I'm no muckle mair nor a bairn in that respeck mysel'.  In fac, this verra mornin', at the beuk, I jist thocht I was readin' a gran' godly ballant, an' it soundet nane the waur for the notion o't.”  “You should have been a poet yourself, Mr. Elginbrod.”  “Na, na; I ken naething aboot yer poetry.  I hae read auld John Milton ower an' ower, though I dinna believe the half o't; but, oh! weel I like some o' the bonny bitties at the en' o't.”  “Il Penseroso, for instance?”  “Is that hoo ye ca't?  I ken't weel by the sicht, but hardly by the soun'.  I aye missed the name o't, an' took to the thing itsel'. Eh, man!--I beg yer pardon, sir--but its wonnerfu' bonny!”  “I'll come in some evening, and we'll have a chat about it,” replied Sutherland. “I must go to my work now.”  “We'll a' be verra happy to see you, sir.  Good mornin', sir.”  “Good morning.”  David went to the garden, where there was not much to be done in the way of education at this season of the year; and Sutherland to the school-room, where he was busy, all the rest of the morning and part of the afternoon, with Caesar and Virgil, Algebra and Euclid; food upon which intellectual babes are reared to the stature of college youths.  Sutherland was himself only a youth; for he had gone early to college, and had not yet quite completed the curriculum.  He was now filling up with teaching, the recess between his third and his fourth winter at one of the Aberdeen Universities.  He was the son of an officer, belonging to the younger branch of a family of some historic distinction and considerable wealth.  This officer, though not far removed from the estate and title as well, had nothing to live upon but his half-pay; for, to the disgust of his family, he had married a Welsh girl of ancient descent, in whose line the poverty must have been at least coeval with the history, to judge from the perfection of its development in the case of her father; and his relations made this the excuse for quarrelling with him; so relieving themselves from any obligations they might have been supposed to lie under, of rendering him assistance of some sort or other.  This, however, rather suited the temperament of Major Robert Sutherland, who was prouder in his poverty than they in their riches.  So he disowned them for ever, and accommodated himself, with the best grace in the world, to his yet more straitened circumstances.  He resolved, however, cost what it might in pinching and squeezing, to send his son to college before turning him out to shift for himself.  In this Mrs. Sutherland was ready to support him to the utmost; and so they had managed to keep their boy at college for three sessions; after the last of which, instead of returning home, as he had done on previous occasions, he had looked about him for a temporary engagement as tutor, and soon found the situation he now occupied in the family of William Glasford, Esq., of Turriepuffit, where he intended to remain no longer than the commencement of the session, which would be his fourth and last.  To what he should afterwards devote himself he had by no means made up his mind, except that it must of necessity be hard work of some kind or other.  So he had at least the virtue of desiring to be independent.  His other goods and bads must come out in the course of the story.  His pupils were rather stupid and rather good-natured; so that their temperament operated to confirm their intellectual condition, and to render the labour of teaching them considerably irksome.  But he did his work tolerably well, and was not so much interested in the result as to be pained at the moderate degree of his success.  At the time of which I write, however, the probability as to his success was scarcely ascertained, for he had been only a fortnight at the task.  It was the middle of the month of April, in a rather backward season.  The weather had been stormy, with frequent showers of sleet and snow.  Old winter was doing his best to hold young Spring back by the skirts of her garment, and very few of the wild flowers had yet ventured to look out of their warm beds in the mould. Sutherland, therefore, had made but few discoveries in the neighbourhood.  Not that the weather would have kept him to the house, had he had any particular desire to go out; but, like many other students, he had no predilection for objectless exertion, and preferred the choice of his own weather indoors, namely, from books and his own imaginings, to an encounter with the keen blasts of the North, charged as they often were with sharp bullets of hail.  When the sun did shine out between the showers, his cold glitter upon the pools of rain or melted snow, and on the wet evergreens and gravel walks, always drove him back from the window with a shiver.  The house, which was of very moderate size and comfort, stood in the midst of plantations, principally of Scotch firs and larches, some of the former old and of great growth, so that they had arrived at the true condition of the tree, which seems to require old age for the perfection of its idea.  There was very little to be seen from the windows except this wood, which, somewhat gloomy at almost any season, was at the present cheerless enough; and Sutherland found it very dreary indeed, as exchanged for the wide view from his own home on the side of an open hill in the Highlands.  In the midst of circumstances so uninteresting, it is not to be wondered at, that the glimpse of a pretty maiden should, one morning, occasion him some welcome excitement.  Passing downstairs to breakfast, he observed the drawing-room door ajar, and looked in to see what sort of a room it was; for so seldom was it used that he had never yet entered it.  There stood a young girl, peeping, with mingled curiosity and reverence, into a small gilt-leaved volume, which she had lifted from the table by which she stood.  He watched her for a moment with some interest; when she, seeming to become mesmerically aware that she was not alone, looked up, blushed deeply, put down the book in confusion, and proceeded to dust some of the furniture.  It was his first sight of Margaret.  Some of the neighbours were expected to dinner, and her aid was in requisition to get the grand room of the house prepared for the occasion.  He supposed her to belong to the household, till, one day, feeling compelled to go out for a stroll, he caught sight of her so occupied at the door of her father's cottage, that he perceived at once that must be her home: she was, in fact, seated upon a stool, paring potatoes.  She saw him as well, and, apparently ashamed at the recollection of having been discovered idling in the drawing-room, rose and went in.  He had met David once or twice about the house, and, attracted by his appearance, had had some conversation with him; but he did not know where he lived, nor that he was the father of the girl whom he had seen.     CHAPTER III.  THE DAISY AND THE PRIMROSE.  Dear secret Greenness, nursed below   Tempests and winds and winter nights! Vex not that but one sees thee grow;   That One made all these lesser lights.  HENRY VAUGHAN.   It was, of course, quite by accident that Sutherland had met Margaret in the fir-wood.  The wind had changed during the night, and swept all the clouds from the face of the sky; and when he looked out in the morning, he saw the fir-tops waving in the sunlight, and heard the sound of a south-west wind sweeping through them with the tune of running waters in its course.  It is a well-practised ear that can tell whether the sound it hears be that of gently falling waters, or of wind flowing through the branches of firs.  Sutherland's heart, reviving like a dormouse in its hole, began to be joyful at the sight of the genial motions of Nature, telling of warmth and blessedness at hand.  Some goal of life, vague but sure, seemed to glimmer through the appearances around him, and to stimulate him to action.  Be dressed in haste, and went out to meet the Spring.  He wandered into the heart of the wood.  The sunlight shone like a sunset upon the red trunks and boughs of the old fir-trees, but like the first sunrise of the world upon the new green fringes that edged the young shoots of the larches.  High up, hung the memorials of past summers in the rich brown tassels of the clustering cones; while the ground under foot was dappled with sunshine on the fallen fir-needles, and the great fallen cones which had opened to scatter their autumnal seed, and now lay waiting for decay.  Overhead, the tops whence they had fallen, waved in the wind, as in welcome of the Spring, with that peculiar swinging motion which made the poets of the sixteenth century call them “sailing pines.”  The wind blew cool, but not cold; and was filled with a delicious odour from the earth, which Sutherland took as a sign that she was coming alive at last.  And the Spring he went out to meet, met him.  For, first, at the foot of a tree, he spied a tiny primrose, peeping out of its rough, careful leaves; and he wondered how, by any metamorphosis, such leaves could pass into such a flower.  Had he seen the mother of the next spring-messenger he was about to meet, the same thought would have returned in another form.  For, next, as he passed on with the primrose in his hand, thinking it was almost cruel to pluck it, the Spring met him, as if in her own shape, in the person of Margaret, whom he spied a little way off, leaning against the stem of a Scotch fir, and looking up to its top swaying overhead in the first billows of the outburst ocean of life.  He went up to her with some shyness; for the presence of even a child-maiden was enough to make Sutherland shy--partly from the fear of startling her shyness, as one feels when drawing near a couching fawn.  But she, when she heard his footsteps, dropped her eyes slowly from the tree-top, and, as if she were in her own sanctuary, waited his approach.  He said nothing at first, but offered her, instead of speech, the primrose he had just plucked, which she received with a smile of the eyes only, and the sweetest “thank you, sir,” he had ever heard.  But while she held the primrose in her hand, her eyes wandered to the book which, according to his custom, Sutherland had caught up as he left the house.  It was the only well-bound book in his possession; and the eyes of Margaret, not yet tutored by experience, naturally expected an entrancing page within such beautiful boards; for the gayest bindings she had seen, were those of a few old annuals up at the house--and were they not full of the most lovely tales and pictures? In this case, however, her expectation was not vain; for the volume was, as I have already disclosed, Coleridge's Poems.  Seeing her eyes fixed upon the book--“Would you like to read it?”  said he.  “If you please, sir,” answered Margaret, her eyes brightening with the expectation of deliglit.  “Are you fond of poetry?”  Her face fell.  The only poetry she knew was the Scotch Psalms and Paraphrases, and such last-century verses as formed the chief part of the selections in her school-books; for this was a very retired parish, and the newer books had not yet reached its school.  She had hoped chiefly for tales.  “I dinna ken much about poetry,” she answered, trying to speak English. “There's an old book o't on my father's shelf; but the letters o't are auld-fashioned, an' I dinna care aboot it.”  “But this is quite easy to read, and very beautiful,” said Hugh.  The girl's eyes glistened for a moment, and this was all her reply.  “Would you like to read it?” resumed Hugh, seeing no further answer was on the road.  She held out her hand towards the volume.  When he, in his turn, held the volume towards her hand, she almost snatched it from him, and ran towards the house, without a word of thanks or leave-taking--whether from eagerness, or doubt of the propriety of accepting the offer, Hugh could not conjecture.  He stood for some moments looking after her, and then retraced his steps towards the house.  It would have been something, in the monotony of one of the most trying of positions, to meet one who snatched at the offered means of spiritual growth, even if that disciple had not been a lovely girl, with the woman waking in her eyes.  He commenced the duties of the day with considerably more of energy than he had yet brought to bear on his uninteresting pupils; and this energy did not flag before its effects upon the boys began to react in fresh impulse upon itself.     CHAPTER IV.  THE COTTAGE.  O little Bethlem! poor in walls,   But rich in furniture.  JOHN MASON'S Spiritual Songs.   There was one great alleviation to the various discomforts of Sutherland's tutor-life.  It was, that, except during school-hours, he was expected to take no charge whatever of his pupils.  They ran wild all other times; which was far better, in every way, both for them and for him.  Consequently, he was entirely his own master beyond the fixed margin of scholastic duties; and he soon found that his absence, even from the table, was a matter of no interest to the family.  To be sure, it involved his own fasting till the next meal-time came round--for the lady was quite a household martinet; but that was his own concern.  That very evening, he made his way to David's cottage, about the country supper-time, when he thought he should most likely find him at home.  It was a clear, still, moonlit night, with just an air of frost.  There was light enough for him to see that the cottage was very neat and tidy, looking, in the midst of its little forest, more like an English than a Scotch habitation.  He had had the advantage of a few months' residence in a leafy region on the other side of the Tweed, and so was able to make the comparison.  But what a different leafage that was from this!  That was soft, floating, billowy; this hard, stiff, and straight-lined, interfering so little with the skeleton form, that it needed not to be put off in the wintry season of death, to make the trees in harmony with the landscape.  A light was burning in the cottage, visible through the inner curtain of muslin, and the outer one of frost.  As he approached the door, he heard the sound of a voice; and from the even pitch of the tone, he concluded at once that its owner was reading aloud.  The measured cadence soon convinced him that it was verse that was being read; and the voice was evidently that of David, and not of Margaret.  He knocked at the door.  The voice ceased, chairs were pushed back, and a heavy step approached.  David opened the door himself.  “Eh!  Maister Sutherlan',” said he, “I thocht it micht aiblins be yersel.  Ye're welcome, sir.  Come butt the hoose.  Our place is but sma', but ye'll no min' sitttin' doon wi' our ain sels.  Janet, ooman, this is Maister Sutherlan'.  Maggy, my doo, he's a frien' o' yours, o' a day auld, already.  Ye're kindly welcome, Maister Sutherlan'.  I'm sure it's verra kin' o' you to come an' see the like o' huz.”  As Hugh entered, he saw his own bright volume lying on the table, evidently that from which David had just been reading.  Margaret had already placed for him a cushioned arm-chair, the only comfortable one in the house; and presently, the table being drawn back, they were all seated round the peat-fire on the hearth, the best sort for keeping feet warm at least.  On the crook, or hooked iron-chain suspended within the chimney, hung a three-footed pot, in which potatoes were boiling away merrily for supper.  By the side of the wide chimney, or more properly lum, hung an iron lamp, of an old classical form common to the country, from the beak of which projected, almost horizontally, the lighted wick--the pith of a rush.  The light perched upon it was small but clear, and by it David had been reading.  Margaret sat right under it, upon a creepie, or small three-legged wooden stool.  Sitting thus, with the light falling on her from above, Hugh could not help thinking she looked very pretty.  Almost the only object in the distance from which the feeble light was reflected, was the patch-work counterpane of a little bed filling a recess in the wall, fitted with doors which stood open.  It was probably Margaret's refuge for the night.  “Well,” said the tutor, after they had been seated a few minutes, and had had some talk about the weather--surely no despicable subject after such a morning--the first of Spring--“well, how do you like the English poet, Mr. Elginbrod?”  “Spier that at me this day week, Maister Sutherlan', an' I'll aiblins answer ye; but no the nicht, no the nicht.”  “What for no?” said Hugh, taking up the dialect.  “For ae thing, we're nae clean through wi' the auld sailor's story yet; an' gin I hae learnt ae thing aboon anither, its no to pass jeedgment upo' halves.  I hae seen ill weather half the simmer, an' a thrang corn-yard after an' a', an' that o' the best.  No that I'm ill pleased wi' the bonny ballant aither.”  “Weel, will ye jist lat me read the lave o't till ye?”  “Wi' muckle pleesur, sir, an' mony thanks.”  He showed Hugh how far they had got in the reading of the “Ancient Mariner”; whereupon he took up the tale, and carried it on to the end.  He had some facility in reading with expression, and his few affectations--for it must be confessed he was not free of such faults--were not of a nature to strike uncritical hearers.  When he had finished, he looked up, and his eye chancing to light upon Margaret first, he saw that her cheek was quite pale, and her eyes overspread with the film, not of coming tears, but of emotion notwithstanding.  “Well,” said Hugh, again, willing to break the silence, and turning towards David, “what do you think of it now you have heard it all?”  Whether Janet interrupted her husband or not, I cannot tell; but she certainly spoke first:  “Tshâvah!”--equivalent to pshaw--“it's a' lees.  What for are ye knittin' yer broos ower a leein' ballant--a' havers as weel as lees?”  “I'm no jist prepared to say sae muckle, Janet,” replied David; “there's mony a thing 'at's lees, as ye ca't, 'at's no lees a' through.  Ye see, Maister Sutherlan', I'm no gleg at the uptak, an' it jist taks me twise as lang as ither fowk to see to the ootside o' a thing.  Whiles a sentence 'ill leuk to me clean nonsense a'thegither; an' maybe a haill ook efter, it'll come upo' me a' at ance; an' fegs! it's the best thing in a' the beuk.”  Margaret's eyes were fixed on her father with a look which I can only call faithfulness, as if every word he spoke was truth, whether she could understand it or not.  “But perhaps we may look too far for meanings sometimes,” suggested Sutherland.  “Maybe, maybe; but when a body has a suspeecion o' a trowth, he sud never lat sit till he's gotten eyther hit, or an assurance that there's nothing there.  But there's jist ae thing, in the poem 'at I can pit my finger upo', an' say 'at it's no richt clear to me whether it's a' straucht-foret or no?”  “What's that, Mr. Elginbrod?”  “It's jist this--what for a' thae sailor-men fell doon deid, an' the chield 'at shot the bonnie burdie, an' did a' the mischeef, cam' to little hurt i' the 'en--comparateevely.”  “Well,” said Hugh, “I confess I'm not prepared to answer the question.  If you get any light on the subject”--  “Ow, I daursay I may.  A heap o' things comes to me as I'm takin' a daunder by mysel' i' the gloamin'.  I'll no say a thing's wrang till I hae tried it ower an' ower; for maybe I haena a richt grip o' the thing ava.”  “What can ye expec, Dawvid, o' a leevin' corp, an' a' that?--ay, twa hunner corps--fower times fifty's twa hunner--an' angels turnin' sailors, an' sangs gaein fleein' aboot like laverocks, and tummelin' doon again, tired like?--Gude preserve's a'!”  “Janet, do ye believe 'at ever a serpent spak?”  “Hoot!  Dawvid, the deil was in him, ye ken.”  “The deil a word o' that's i' the word itsel, though,” rejoined David with a smile.  “Dawvid,” said Janet, solemnly, and with some consternation, “ye're no gaein' to tell me, sittin' there, at ye dinna believe ilka word 'at's prentit atween the twa brods o' the Bible?  What will Maister Sutherlan' think o' ye?”  “Janet, my bonnie lass--” and here David's eyes beamed upon his wife--“I believe as mony o' them as ye do, an' maybe a wheen mair, my dawtie.  Keep yer min' easy aboot that.  But ye jist see 'at fowk warna a'thegither saitisfeed aboot a sairpent speikin', an' sae they leukit aboot and aboot till at last they fand the deil in him.  Gude kens whether he was there or no.  Noo, ye see hoo, gin we was to leuk weel aboot thae corps, an' thae angels, an' a' that queer stuff--but oh! it's bonny stuff tee!--we micht fa' in wi' something we didna awthegither expec, though we was leukin' for't a' the time. Sae I maun jist think aboot it, Mr. Sutherlan'; an' I wad fain read it ower again, afore I lippen on giein' my opingan on the maitter. Ye cud lave the bit beukie, sir?  We'se tak' guid care o't.”  “Ye're verra welcome to that or ony ither beuk I hae,” replied Hugh, who began to feel already as if he were in the hands of a superior.  “Mony thanks; but ye see, sir, we hae eneuch to chow upo' for an aucht days or so.”  By this time the potatoes wore considered to be cooked, and were accordingly lifted off the fire.  The water was then poured away, the lid put aside, and the pot hung once more upon the crook, hooked a few rings further up in the chimney, in order that the potatoes might be thoroughly dry before they were served.  Margaret was now very busy spreading the cloth and laying spoon and plates on the table.  Hugh rose to go.  “Will ye no bide,” said Janet, in a most hospitable tone, “an' tak' a het pitawta wi' us?”  “I'm afraid of being troublesome,” answered he.  “Nae fear o' that, gin ye can jist pit up wi' oor hamely meat.”  “Mak nae apologies, Janet, my woman,” said David. “A het pitawta's aye guid fare, for gentle or semple.  Sit ye doun again, Maister Sutherlan'.  Maggy, my doo, whaur's the milk?”  “I thocht Hawkie wad hae a drappy o' het milk by this time,” said Margaret, “and sae I jist loot it be to the last; but I'll hae't drawn in twa minutes.”  And away she went with a jug, commonly called a decanter in that part of the north, in her hand.  “That's hardly fair play to Hawkie,” said David to Janet with a smile.  “Hoot!  Dawvid, ye see we haena a stranger ilka nicht.”  “But really,” said Hugh, “I hope this is the last time you will consider me a stranger, for I shall be here a great many times--that is, if you don't get tired of me.”  “Gie us the chance at least, Maister Sutherlan'.  It's no sma' preevilege to fowk like us to hae a frien' wi' sae muckle buik learnin' as ye hae, sir.”  “I am afraid it looks more to you than it really is.”  “Weel, ye see, we maun a' leuk at the starns frae the hicht o' oor ain een.  An' ye seem nigher to them by a lang growth than the lave o's.  My man, ye ought to be thankfu'.”  With the true humility that comes of worshipping the Truth, David had not the smallest idea that he was immeasurably nearer to the stars than Hugh Sutherland.  Maggie having returned with her jug full of frothy milk, and the potatoes being already heaped up in a wooden bowl or bossie in the middle of the table, sending the smoke of their hospitality to the rafters, Janet placed a smaller wooden bowl, called a caup, filled with deliciously yellow milk of Hawkie's latest gathering, for each individual of the company, with an attendant horn-spoon by its side. They all drew their chairs to the table, and David, asking no blessing, as it was called, but nevertheless giving thanks for the blessing already bestowed, namely, the perfect gift of food, invited Hugh to make a supper.  Each, in primitive but not ungraceful fashion, took a potatoe from the dish with the fingers, and ate it, “bite and sup,” with the help of the horn-spoon for the milk.  Hugh thought he had never supped more pleasantly, and could not help observing how far real good-breeding is independent of the forms and refinements of what has assumed to itself the name of society.  Soon after supper was over, it was time for him to go; so, after kind hand-shakings and good nights, David accompanied him to the road, where he left him to find his way home by the star-light.  As he went, he could not help pondering a little over the fact that a labouring man had discovered a difficulty, perhaps a fault, in one of his favourite poems, which had never suggested itself to him.  He soon satisfied himself, however, by coming to the conclusion that the poet had not cared about the matter at all, having had no further intention in the poem than Hugh himself had found in it, namely, witchery and loveliness.  But it seemed to the young student a wonderful fact, that the intercourse which was denied him in the laird's family, simply from their utter incapacity of yielding it, should be afforded him in the family of a man who had followed the plough himself once, perhaps did so still, having risen only to be the overseer and superior assistant of labourers.  He certainly felt, on his way home, much more reconciled to the prospect of his sojourn at Turriepuffit, than he would have thought it possible he ever should.  David lingered a few moments, looking up at the stars, before he re-entered his cottage.  When he rejoined his wife and child, he found the Bible already open on the table for their evening devotions.  I will close this chapter, as I began the first, with something like his prayer.  David's prayers were characteristic of the whole man; but they also partook, in far more than ordinary, of the mood of the moment.  His last occupation had been star-gazing:  “O thou, wha keeps the stars alicht, an' our souls burnin' wi' a licht aboon that o' the stars, grant that they may shine afore thee as the stars for ever and ever.  An' as thou hauds the stars burnin' a' the nicht, whan there's no man to see, so haud thou the licht burnin' in our souls, whan we see neither thee nor it, but are buried in the grave o' sleep an' forgetfu'ness.  Be thou by us, even as a mother sits by the bedside o' her ailin' wean a' the lang nicht; only be thou nearer to us, even in our verra souls, an' watch ower the warl' o' dreams that they mak' for themsels.  Grant that more an' more thochts o' thy thinkin' may come into our herts day by day, till there shall be at last an open road atween thee an' us, an' thy angels may ascend and descend upon us, so that we may be in thy heaven, e'en while we are upo' thy earth: Amen.”     CHAPTER V.  THE STUDENTS.  In wood and stone, not the softest, but hardest, be always aptest for portraiture, both fairest for pleasure, and most durable for profit.  Hard wits be hard to receive, but sure to keep; painful without weariness, heedful without wavering, constant without new-fangleness; bearing heavy things, though not lightly, yet willingly; entering hard things, though not easily, yet deeply; and so come to that perfectness of learning in the end, that quick wits seem in hope but do not in deed, or else very seldom ever attain unto.--ROGER ASCHAM.--The Schoolmaster.  Two or three very simple causes united to prevent Hugh from repeating his visit to David so soon as he would otherwise have done.  One was, that, the fine weather continuing, he was seized with the desire of exploring the neighbourhood.  The spring, which sets some wild animals to the construction of new dwellings, incites man to the enlarging of his, making, as it were, by discovery, that which lies around him his own.  So he spent the greater parts of several evenings in wandering about the neighbourhood; till at length the moonlight failed him.  Another cause was, that, in the act of searching for some books for his boys, in an old garret of the house, which was at once lumber room and library, he came upon some stray volumes of the Waverley novels, with which he was as yet only partially acquainted.  These absorbed many of his spare hours. But one evening, while reading the Heart of Midlothian, the thought struck him--what a character David would have been for Sir Walter. Whether he was right or not is a question; but the notion brought David so vividly before him, that it roused the desire to see him. He closed the book at once, and went to the cottage.  “We're no lik'ly to ca' ye onything but a stranger yet, Maister Sutherlan',” said David, as he entered.  “I've been busy since I saw you,” was all the excuse Hugh offered.  “Weel, ye'r welcome noo; and ye've jist come in time after a', for it's no that mony hours sin' I fand it oot awthegither to my ain settisfaction.”  “Found out what?” said Hugh; for he had forgotten all about the perplexity in which he had left David, and which had been occupying his thoughts ever since their last interview.  “Aboot the cross-bow an' the birdie, ye ken,” answered David, in a tone of surprise.  “Yes, to be sure.  How stupid of me!” said Hugh.  “Weel, ye see, the meanin' o' the haill ballant is no that ill to win at, seein' the poet himsel' tells us that.  It's jist no to be proud or ill-natured to oor neebours, the beasts and birds, for God made ane an' a' o's.  But there's harder things in't nor that, and yon's the hardest.  But ye see it was jist an unlucky thochtless deed o' the puir auld sailor's, an' I'm thinkin' he was sair reprocht in's hert the minit he did it.  His mates was fell angry at him, no for killin' the puir innocent craytur, but for fear o' ill luck in consequence.  Syne when nane followed, they turned richt roun', an' took awa' the character o' the puir beastie efter 'twas deid.  They appruved o' the verra thing 'at he was nae doot sorry for.--But onything to haud aff o' themsels!  Nae suner cam the calm, than roun' they gaed again like the weathercock, an' naething wad content them bit hingin' the deid craytur about the auld man's craig, an' abusin' him forby.  Sae ye see hoo they war a wheen selfish crayturs, an' a hantle waur nor the man 'at was led astray into an ill deed.  But still he maun rue't.  Sae Death got them, an' a kin' o' leevin' Death, a she Death as 'twar, an' in some respecks may be waur than the ither, got grips o' him, puir auld body!  It's a' fair and richt to the backbane o' the ballant, Maister Sutherlan', an' that I'se uphaud.”  Hugh could not help feeling considerably astonished to hear this criticism from the lips of one whom he considered an uneducated man. For he did not know that there are many other educations besides a college one, some of them tending far more than that to develope the common-sense, or faculty of judging of things by their nature.  Life intelligently met and honestly passed, is the best education of all; except that higher one to which it is intended to lead, and to which it had led David.  Both these educations, however, were nearly unknown to the student of books.  But he was still more astonished to hear from the lips of Margaret, who was sitting by:  “That's it, father; that's it!  I was jist ettlin' efter that same thing mysel, or something like it, but ye put it in the richt words exackly.”  The sound of her voice drew Hugh's eyes upon her: he was astonished at the alteration in her countenance.  While she spoke it was absolutely beautiful.  As soon as she ceased speaking, it settled back into its former shadowless calm.  Her father gave her one approving glance and nod, expressive of no surprise at her having approached the same discovery as himself, but testifying pleasure at the coincidence of their opinions.  Nothing was left for Hugh but to express his satisfaction with the interpretation of the difficulty, and to add, that the poem would henceforth possess fresh interest for him.  After this, his visits became more frequent; and at length David made a request which led to their greater frequency still.  It was to this effect:  “Do ye think, Mr. Sutherlan', I could do onything at my age at the mathematics?  I unnerstan' weel eneuch hoo to measur' lan', an' that kin' o' thing.  I jist follow the rule.  But the rule itsel's a puzzler to me.  I dinna understan' it by half.  Noo it seems to me that the best o' a rule is, no to mak ye able to do a thing, but to lead ye to what maks the rule richt--to the prenciple o' the thing. It's no 'at I'm misbelievin' the rule, but I want to see the richts o't.”  “I've no doubt you could learn fast enough,” replied Hugh. “I shall be very happy to help you with it.”  “Na, na; I'm no gaein to trouble you.  Ye hae eneuch to do in that way.  But if ye could jist spare me ane or twa o' yer beuks whiles--ony o' them 'at ye think proper, I sud be muckle obleeged te ye.”  Hugh promised and fulfilled; but the result was, that, before long, both the father and the daughter were seated at the kitchen-table, every evening, busy with Euclid and Algebra; and that, on most evenings, Hugh was present as their instructor.  It was quite a new pleasure to him.  Few delights surpass those of imparting knowledge to the eager recipient.  What made Hugh's tutor-life irksome, was partly the excess of his desire to communicate, over the desire of his pupils to partake.  But here there was no labour.  All the questions were asked by the scholars.  A single lesson had not passed, however, before David put questions which Hugh was unable to answer, and concerning which he was obliged to confess his ignorance.  Instead of being discouraged, as eager questioners are very ready to be when they receive no answer, David merely said, “Weel, weel, we maun bide a wee,” and went on with what he was able to master.  Meantime Margaret, though forced to lag a good way behind her father, and to apply much more frequently to their tutor for help, yet secured all she got; and that is great praise for any student.  She was not by any means remarkably quick, but she knew when she did not understand; and that is a sure and indispensable step towards understanding.  It is indeed a rarer gift than the power of understanding itself.  The gratitude of David was too deep to be expressed in any formal thanks.  It broke out at times in two or three simple words when the conversation presented an opportunity, or in the midst of their work, as by its own self-birth, ungenerated by association.  During the lesson, which often lasted more than two hours, Janet would be busy about the room, and in and out of it, with a manifest care to suppress all unnecessary bustle.  As soon as Hugh made his appearance, she would put off the stout shoes--man's shoes, as we should consider them--which she always wore at other times, and put on a pair of bauchles; that is, an old pair of her Sunday shoes, put down at heel, and so converted into slippers, with which she could move about less noisily.  At times her remarks would seem to imply that she considered it rather absurd in her husband to trouble himself with book-learning; but evidently on the ground that he knew everything already that was worthy of the honour of his acquaintance; whereas, with regard to Margaret, her heart was as evidently full of pride at the idea of the education her daughter was getting from the laird's own tutor.  Now and then she would stand still for a moment, and gaze at them, with her bright black eyes, from under the white frills of her mutch, her bare brown arms akimbo, and a look of pride upon her equally brown honest face.  Her dress consisted of a wrapper, or short loose jacket, of printed calico, and a blue winsey petticoat, which she had a habit of tucking between her knees, to keep it out of harm's way, as often as she stooped to any wet work, or, more especially, when doing anything by the fire.  Margaret's dress was, in ordinary, like her mother's, with the exception of the cap; but, every evening, when their master was expected, she put off her wrapper, and substituted a gown of the same material, a cotton print; and so, with her plentiful dark hair gathered neatly under a net of brown silk, the usual head-dress of girls in her position, both in and out of doors, sat down dressed for the sacrament of wisdom.  David made no other preparation than the usual evening washing of his large well-wrought hands, and bathing of his head, covered with thick dark hair, plentifully lined with grey, in a tub of cold water; from which his face, which was “cremsin dyed ingrayne” by the weather, emerged glowing.  He sat down at the table in his usual rough blue coat and plain brass buttons; with his breeches of broad-striped corduroy, his blue-ribbed stockings, and leather gaiters, or cuiticans, disposed under the table, and his shoes, with five rows of broad-headed nails in the soles, projecting from beneath it on the other side; for he was a tall man--six feet still, although five-and-fifty, and considerably bent in the shoulders with hard work.  Sutherland's style was that of a gentleman who must wear out his dress-coat.  Such was the group which, three or four evenings in the week, might be seen in David Elginbrod's cottage, seated around the white deal table, with their books and slates upon it, and searching, by the light of a tallow candle, substituted as more convenient, for the ordinary lamp, after the mysteries of the universe.  The influences of reviving nature and of genial companionship operated very favourably upon Hugh's spirits, and consequently upon his whole powers.  For some time he had, as I have already hinted, succeeded in interesting his boy-pupils in their studies; and now the progress they made began to be appreciable to themselves as well as to their tutor.  This of course made them more happy and more diligent.  There were no attempts now to work upon their parents for a holiday; no real or pretended head or tooth-aches, whose disability was urged against the greater torture of ill-conceded mental labour.  They began in fact to understand; and, in proportion to the beauty and value of the thing understood, to understand is to enjoy.  Therefore the laird and his lady could not help seeing that the boys were doing well, far better in fact than they had ever done before; and consequently began not only to prize Hugh's services, but to think more highly of his office than had been their wont. The laird would now and then invite him to join him in a tumbler of toddy after dinner, or in a ride round the farm after school hours. But it must be confessed that these approaches to friendliness were rather irksome to Hugh; for whatever the laird might have been as a collegian, he was certainly now nothing more than a farmer.  Where David Elginbrod would have described many a “bonny sicht,” the laird only saw the probable results of harvest, in the shape of figures in his banking book.  On one occasion, Hugh roused his indignation by venturing to express his admiration of the delightful mingling of colours in a field where a good many scarlet poppies grew among the green blades of the corn, indicating, to the agricultural eye, the poverty of the soil where they were found.  This fault in the soil, the laird, like a child, resented upon the poppies themselves.  “Nasty, ugly weyds!  We'll hae ye admirin' the smut neist,” said he, contemptuously; “'cause the bairns can bleck ane anither's faces wi't.”  “But surely,” said Hugh, “putting other considerations aside, you must allow that the colour, especially when mingled with that of the corn, is beautiful.”  “Deil hae't!  It's jist there 'at I canna bide the sicht o't. Beauty ye may ca' 't!  I see nane o't.  I'd as sune hae a reid-heedit bairn, as see thae reid-coatit rascals i' my corn.  I houp ye're no gaen to cram stuff like that into the heeds o' the twa laddies.  Faith! we'll hae them sawin' thae ill-faured weyds amang the wheyt neist.  Poapies ca' ye them?  Weel I wat they're the Popp's ain bairns, an' the scarlet wumman to the mither o' them. Ha! ha! ha!”  Having manifested both wit and Protestantism in the closing sentence of his objurgation, the laird relapsed into good humour and stupidity.  Hugh would gladly have spent such hours in David's cottage instead; but he was hardly prepared to refuse his company to Mr. Glasford.     CHAPTER VI.  THE LAIRD'S LADY.  Ye archewyves, standith at defence, Sin ye been strong, as is a great camayle; Ne suffer not that men you don offence. And slender wives, fell as in battaile, Beth eager, as is a tiger, yond in Inde; Aye clappith as a mill, I you counsaile.  CHAUCER.--The Clerk's Tale.   The length and frequency of Hugh's absences, careless as she was of his presence, had already attracted the attention of Mrs. Glasford; and very little trouble had to be expended on the discovery of his haunt.  For the servants knew well enough where he went, and of course had come to their own conclusions as to the object of his visits.  So the lady chose to think it her duty to expostulate with Hugh on the subject.  Accordingly, one morning after breakfast, the laird having gone to mount his horse, and the boys to have a few minutes' play before lessons, Mrs. Glasford, who had kept her seat at the head of the table, waiting for the opportunity, turned towards Hugh who sat reading the week's news, folded her hands on the tablecloth, drew herself up yet a little more stiffly in her chair, and thus addressed him:  “It's my duty, Mr. Sutherland, seein' ye have no mother to look after ye--”  Hugh expected something matronly about his linen or his socks, and put down his newspaper with a smile; but, to his astonishment, she went on--  --“To remonstrate wi' ye, on the impropriety of going so often to David Elginbrod's.  They're not company for a young gentleman like you, Mr. Sutherland.”  “They're good enough company for a poor tutor, Mrs. Glasford,”  replied Hugh, foolishly enough.  “Not at all, not at all,” insisted the lady. “With your connexions--”  “Good gracious! who ever said anything about my connexions?  I never pretended to have any.”  Hugh was getting angry already.  Mrs. Glasford nodded her head significantly, as much as to say, “I know more about you than you imagine,” and then went on:  “Your mother will never forgive me if you get into a scrape with that smooth-faced hussy; and if her father, honest man hasn't eyes enough in his head, other people have--ay, an' tongues too, Mr. Sutherland.”  Hugh was on the point of forgetting his manners, and consigning all the above mentioned organs to perdition; but he managed to restrain his wrath, and merely said that Margaret was one of the best girls he had ever known, and that there was no possible danger of any kind of scrape with her.  This mode of argument, however, was not calculated to satisfy Mrs. Glasford.  She returned to the charge.  “She's a sly puss, with her shy airs and graces.  Her father's jist daft wi' conceit o' her, an' it's no to be surprised if she cast a glamour ower you.  Mr. Sutherland, ye're but young yet.”  Hugh's pride presented any alliance with a lassie who had herded the laird's cows barefoot, and even now tended their own cow, as an all but inconceivable absurdity; and he resented, more than he could have thought possible, the entertainment of such a degrading idea in the mind of Mrs. Glasford.  Indignation prevented him from replying; while she went on, getting more vernacular as she proceeded.  “It's no for lack o' company 'at yer driven to seek theirs, I'm sure.  There's twa as fine lads an' gude scholars as ye'll fin' in the haill kintra-side, no to mention the laird and mysel'.”  But Hugh could bear it no longer; nor would he condescend to excuse or explain his conduct.  “Madam, I beg you will not mention this subject again.”  “But I will mention 't, Mr. Sutherlan'; an' if ye'll no listen to rizzon, I'll go to them 'at maun do't.”  “I am accountable to you, madam, for my conduct in your house, and for the way in which I discharge my duty to your children--no further.”  “Do ye ca' that dischairgin' yer duty to my bairns, to set them the example o' hingin' at a quean's âpron-strings, and fillin' her lug wi' idle havers?  Ca' ye that dischairgin' yer duty?  My certie! a bonny dischairgin'!”  “I never see the girl but in her father and mother's presence.”  “Weel, weel, Mr. Sutherlan',” said Mrs. Glasford, in a final tone, and trying to smother the anger which she felt she had allowed to carry her further than was decorous, “we'll say nae mair aboot it at present; but I maun jist speak to the laird himsel', an' see what he says till 't.”  And, with this threat, she walked out of the room in what she considered a dignified manner.  Hugh was exceedingly annoyed at this treatment, and thought, at first, of throwing up his situation at once; but he got calmer by degrees, and saw that it would be to his own loss, and perhaps to the injury of his friends at the cottage.  So he took his revenge by recalling the excited face of Mrs. Glasford, whose nose had got as red with passion as the protuberance of a turkey-cock when gobbling out its unutterable feelings of disdain.  He dwelt upon this soothing contemplation till a fit of laughter relieved him, and he was able to go and join his pupils as if nothing had happened.  Meanwhile the lady sent for David, who was at work in the garden, into no less an audience-chamber than the drawing-room, the revered abode of all the tutelar deities of the house; chief amongst which were the portraits of the laird and herself: he, plethoric and wrapped in voluminous folds of neckerchief--she long-necked, and lean, and bare-shouldered.  The original of the latter work of art seated herself in the most important chair in the room; and when David, after carefully wiping the shoes he had already wiped three times on his way up, entered with a respectful but no wise obsequious bow, she ordered him, with the air of an empress, to shut the door.  When he had obeyed, she ordered him, in a similar tone, to be seated; for she sought to mingle condescension and conciliation with severity.  “David,” she then began, “I am informed that ye keep open door to our Mr. Sutherland, and that he spends most forenichts in your company.”  “Weel, mem, it's verra true,” was all David's answer.  He sat in an expectant attitude.  “Dawvid, I wonner at ye!” returned Mrs. Glasford, forgetting her dignity, and becoming confidentially remonstrative. “Here's a young gentleman o' talans, wi' ilka prospeck o' waggin' his heid in a poopit some day; an' ye aid an' abet him in idlin' awa' his time at your chimla-lug, duin' waur nor naething ava!  I'm surprised at ye, Dawvid.  I thocht ye had mair sense.”  David looked out of his clear, blue, untroubled eyes, upon the ruffled countenance of his mistress, with an almost paternal smile.  “Weel, mem, I maun say I dinna jist think the young man's in the warst o' company, when he's at our ingle-neuk.  An' for idlin' o' his time awa', it's weel waurd for himsel', forby for us, gin holy words binna lees.”  “What do ye mean, Dawvid?” said the lady rather sharply, for she loved no riddles.  “I mean this, mem: that the young man is jist actin' the pairt o' Peter an' John at the bonny gate o' the temple, whan they said: 'Such as I have, gie I thee;' an' gin' it be more blessed to gie than to receive, as Sant Paul says 'at the Maister himsel' said, the young man 'ill no be the waur aff in's ain learnin', that he impairts o't to them that hunger for't.”  “Ye mean by this, Dawvid, gin ye could express yersel' to the pint, 'at the young man, wha's ower weel paid to instruck my bairns, neglecks them, an' lays himsel' oot upo' ither fowk's weans, wha hae no richt to ettle aboon the station in which their Maker pat them.”  This was uttered with quite a religious fervour of expostulation; for the lady's natural indignation at the thought of Meg Elginbrod having lessons from her boys' tutor, was cowed beneath the quiet steady gaze of the noble-minded peasant father.  “He lays himsel' oot mair upo' the ither fowk themsels' than upo' their weans, mem; though, nae doubt, my Maggy comes in for a gude share.  But for negleckin' o' his duty to you, mem, I'm sure I kenna hoo that can be; for it was only yestreen 'at the laird himsel' said to me, 'at hoo the bairns had never gotten on naething like it wi' ony ither body.”  “The laird's ower ready wi's clavers,” quoth the laird's wife, nettled to find herself in the wrong, and forgetful of her own and her lord's dignity at once. “But,” she pursued, “all I can say is, that I consider it verra improper o' you, wi' a young lass-bairn, to encourage the nichtly veesits o' a young gentleman, wha's sae far aboon her in station, an' dootless will some day be farther yet.”  “Mem!” said David, with dignity, “I'm willin' no to understan' what ye mean.  My Maggy's no ane 'at needs luikin' efter; an' a body had need to be carefu' an' no interfere wi' the Lord's herdin', for he ca's himsel' the Shepherd o' the sheep, an' wee! as I loe her I maun lea' him to lead them wha follow him wherever he goeth.  She'll be no ill guidit, and I'm no gaeing to kep her at ilka turn.”  “Weel, weel! that's yer ain affair, Dawvid, my man,” rejoined Mrs. Glasford, with rising voice and complexion. “A' 'at I hae to add is jist this: 'at as lang as my tutor veesits her”--  “He veesits her no more than me, mem,” interposed David; but his mistress went on with dignified disregard of the interruption--  “Veesits her, I canna, for the sake o' my own bairns, an' the morals o' my hoosehold, employ her aboot the hoose, as I was in the way o' doin' afore.  Good mornin', Dawvid.  I'll speak to the laird himsel', sin' ye'll no heed me.”  “It's more to my lassie, mem, excuse me, to learn to unnerstan' the works o' her Maker, than it is to be employed in your household. Mony thanks, mem, for what ye hev' done in that way afore; an' good mornin' to ye, mem.  I'm sorry we should hae ony misunderstandin', but I canna help it for my pairt.”  With these words David withdrew, rather anxious about the consequences to Hugh of this unpleasant interference on the part of Mrs. Glasford.  That lady's wrath kept warm without much nursing, till the laird came home; when she turned the whole of her battery upon him, and kept up a steady fire until he yielded, and promised to turn his upon David.  But he had more common-sense than his wife in some things, and saw at once how ridiculous it would be to treat the affair as of importance.  So, the next time he saw David, he addressed him half jocularly:  “Weel, Dawvid, you an' the mistress hae been haein' a bit o' a dispute thegither, eh?”  “Weel, sir, we warna a'thegither o' ae min',” said David, with a smile.  “Weel, weel, we maun humour her, ye ken, or it may be the waur for us a', ye ken.”  And the laird nodded with humorous significance.  “I'm sure I sud be glaid, sir; but this is no sma' maitter to me an' my Maggie, for we're jist gettin' food for the verra sowl, sir, frae him an' his beuks.”  “Cudna ye be content wi the beuks wi'out the man, Dawvid?”  “We sud mak' but sma' progress, sir, that get.”  The laird began to be a little nettled himself at David's stiffness about such a small matter, and held his peace.  David resumed:  “Besides, sir, that's a maitter for the young man to sattle, an' no for me.  It wad ill become me, efter a' he's dune for us, to steek the door in's face.  Na, na; as lang's I hae a door to haud open, it's no to be steekit to him.”  “Efter a', the door's mine, Dawvid,” said the laird.  “As lang's I'm in your hoose an' in your service, sir, the door's mine,” retorted David, quietly.  The laird turned and rode away without another word.  What passed between him and his wife never transpired.  Nothing more was said to Hugh as long as he remained at Turriepuffit.  But Margaret was never sent for to the House after this, upon any occasion whatever.  The laird gave her a nod as often as he saw her; but the lady, if they chanced to meet, took no notice of her.  Margaret, on her part, stood or passed with her eyes on the ground, and no further change of countenance than a slight flush of discomfort.  The lessons went on as usual, and happy hours they were for all those concerned.  Often, in after years, and in far different circumstances, the thoughts of Hugh reverted, with a painful yearning, to the dim-lighted cottage, with its clay floor and its deal table; to the earnest pair seated with him at the labours that unfold the motions of the stars; and even to the homely, thickset, but active form of Janet, and that peculiar smile of hers with which, after an apparently snappish speech, spoken with her back to the person addressed, she would turn round her honest face half-apologetically, and shine full upon some one or other of the three, whom she honoured with her whole heart and soul, and who, she feared, might be offended at what she called her “hame-ower fashion of speaking.”  Indeed it was wonderful what a share the motherhood of this woman, incapable as she was of entering into the intellectual occupations of the others, had in producing that sense of home-blessedness, which inwrapt Hugh also in the folds of its hospitality, and drew him towards its heart.  Certain it is that not one of the three would have worked so well without the sense of the presence of Janet, here and there about the room, or in the immediate neighbourhood of it--love watching over labour.  Once a week, always on Saturday nights, Hugh stayed to supper with them: and on these occasions, Janet contrived to have something better than ordinary in honour of their guest.  Still it was of the homeliest country fare, such as Hugh could partake of without the least fear that his presence occasioned any inconvenience to his entertainers.  Nor was Hugh the only giver of spiritual food. Putting aside the rich gifts of human affection and sympathy, which grew more and more pleasant--I can hardly use a stronger word yet--to Hugh every day, many things were spoken by the simple wisdom of David, which would have enlightened Hugh far more than they did, had he been sufficiently advanced to receive them.  But their very simplicity was often far beyond the grasp of his thoughts; for the higher we rise, the simpler we become; and David was one of those of whom is the kingdom of Heaven.  There is a childhood into which we have to grow, just as there is a childhood which we must leave behind; a childlikeness which is the highest gain of humanity, and a childishness from which but few of those who are counted the wisest among men, have freed themselves in their imagined progress towards the reality of things.     CHAPTER VII.  THE SECRET OF THE WOOD.  The unthrift sunne shot vitall gold,   A thousand pieces; And heaven its azure did unfold,   Chequered with snowy fleeces.      The air was all in spice,        And every bush      A garland wore: Thus fed my Eyes,        But all the Eare lay hush.  HENRY VAUGHAN.   It was not in mathematics alone that Hugh Sutherland was serviceable to Margaret Elginbrod.  That branch of study had been chosen for her father, not for her; but her desire to learn had led her to lay hold upon any mental provision with which the table happened to be spread; and the more eagerly that her father was a guest at the same feast.  Before long, Hugh bethought him that it might possibly be of service to her, in the course of her reading, if he taught her English a little more thoroughly than she had probably picked it up at the parish school, to which she had been in the habit of going till within a very short period of her acquaintance with the tutor.--The English reader must not suppose the term parish school to mean what the same term would mean if used in England.  Boys and girls of very different ranks go to the Scotch parish schools, and the fees are so small as to place their education within the reach of almost the humblest means.--To his proposal to this effect Margaret responded thankfully; and it gave Hugh an opportunity of directing her attention to many of the more delicate distinctions in literature, for the appreciation of which she manifested at once a remarkable aptitude.  Coleridge's poems had been read long ago; some of them, indeed, almost committed to memory in the process of repeated perusal.  No doubt a good many of them must have been as yet too abstruse for her; not in the least, however, from inaptitude in her for such subjects as they treated of, but simply because neither the terms nor the modes of thought could possibly have been as yet presented to her in so many different positions as to enable her to comprehend their scope.  Hugh lent her Sir Walter's poems next, but those she read at an eye-glance.  She returned the volume in a week, saying merely, they were “verra bonnie stories.”  He saw at once that, to have done them justice with the girl, he ought to have lent them first.  But that could not be helped now; and what should come next? Upon this he took thought.  His library was too small to cause much perplexity of choice, but for a few days he continued undecided.  Meantime the interest he felt in his girl-pupil deepened greatly. She became a kind of study to him.  The expression of her countenance was far inferior to her intelligence and power of thought.  It was still to excess--almost dull in ordinary; not from any fault in the mould of the features, except, perhaps, in the upper lip, which seemed deficient in drawing, if I may be allowed the expression; but from the absence of that light which indicates the presence of active thought and feeling within.  In this respect her face was like the earthen pitcher of Gideon: it concealed the light.  She seemed to have, to a peculiar degree, the faculty of retiring inside.  But now and then, while he was talking to her, and doubtful, from the lack of expression, whether she was even listening with attention to what he was saying, her face would lighten up with a radiant smile of intelligence; not, however, throwing the light upon him, and in a moment reverting to its former condition of still twilight.  Her person seemed not to be as yet thoroughly possessed or informed by her spirit.  It sat apart within her; and there was no ready transit from her heart to her face. This lack of presence in the face is quite common in pretty school-girls and rustic beauties; but it was manifest to an unusual degree in the case of Margaret.  Yet most of the forms and lines in her face were lovely; and when the light did shine through them for a passing moment, her countenance seemed absolutely beautiful. Hence it grew into an almost haunting temptation with Hugh, to try to produce this expression, to unveil the coy light of the beautiful soul.  Often he tried; often he failed, and sometimes he succeeded. Had they been alone it might have become dangerous--I mean for Hugh; I cannot tell for Margaret.  When they first met, she had just completed her seventeenth year; but, at an age when a town-bred girl is all but a woman, her manners were those of a child.  This childishness, however, soon began to disappear, and the peculiar stillness of her face, of which I have already said so much, made her seem older than she was.  It was now early summer, and all the other trees in the wood--of which there were not many besides the firs of various kinds--had put on their fresh leaves, heaped up in green clouds between the wanderer and the heavens.  In the morning the sun shone so clear upon these, that, to the eyes of one standing beneath, the light seemed to dissolve them away to the most ethereal forms of glorified foliage.  They were to be claimed for earth only by the shadows that the one cast upon the other, visible from below through the transparent leaf.  This effect is very lovely in the young season of the year, when the leaves are more delicate and less crowded; and especially in the early morning, when the light is most clear and penetrating.  By the way, I do not think any man is compelled to bid good-bye to his childhood: every man may feel young in the morning, middle-aged in the afternoon, and old at night.  A day corresponds to a life, and the portions of the one are “pictures in little” of the seasons of the other.  Thus far man may rule even time, and gather up, in a perfect being, youth and age at once.  One morning, about six o'clock, Hugh, who had never been so early in the wood since the day he had met Margaret there, was standing under a beech-tree, looking up through its multitudinous leaves, illuminated, as I have attempted to describe, with the sidelong rays of the brilliant sun.  He was feeling young, and observing the forms of nature with a keen discriminating gaze: that was all.  Fond of writing verses, he was studying nature, not as a true lover, but as one who would hereafter turn his discoveries to use.  For it must be confessed that nature affected him chiefly through the medium of poetry; and that he was far more ambitious of writing beautiful things about nature than of discovering and understanding, for their own sakes, any of her hidden yet patent meanings.  Changing his attitude after a few moments, he descried, under another beech-tree, not far from him, Margaret, standing and looking up fixedly as he had been doing a moment before.  He approached her, and she, hearing his advance, looked, and saw him, but did not move.  He thought he saw the glimmer of tears in her eyes.  She was the first to speak, however.  “What were you seeing up there, Mr. Sutherland?”  “I was only looking at the bright leaves, and the shadows upon them.”  “Ah!  I thocht maybe ye had seen something.”  “What do you mean, Margaret?”  “I dinna richtly ken mysel'.  But I aye expeck to see something in this fir-wood.  I'm here maist mornin's as the day dawns, but I'm later the day.”  “We were later than usual at our work last night.  But what kind of thing do you expect to see?”  “That's jist what I dinna ken.  An' I canna min' whan I began to come here first, luikin' for something.  I've tried mony a time, but I canna min', do what I like.”  Margaret had never said so much about herself before.  I can account for it only on the supposition that Hugh had gradually assumed in her mind a kind of pastoral superiority, which, at a favourable moment, inclined her to impart her thoughts to him.  But he did not know what to say to this strange fact in her history.  She went on, however, as if, having broken the ice, she must sweep it away as well.  “The only thing 'at helps me to account for't, is a picter in our auld Bible, o' an angel sittin' aneth a tree, and haudin' up his han' as gin he were speakin' to a woman 'at's stan'in' afore him. Ilka time 'at I come across that picter, I feel direckly as gin I war my lane in this fir-wood here; sae I suppose that when I was a wee bairn, I maun hae come oot some mornin' my lane, wi' the expectation o' seein' an angel here waitin' for me, to speak to me like the ane i' the Bible.  But never an angel hae I seen.  Yet I aye hae an expectation like o' seein' something, I kenna what; for the whole place aye seems fu' o' a presence, an' it's a hantle mair to me nor the kirk an' the sermon forby; an' for the singin', the soun' i' the fir-taps is far mair solemn and sweet at the same time, an' muckle mair like praisin' o' God than a' the psalms thegither. But I aye think 'at gin I could hear Milton playin' on's organ, it would be mair like that soun' o' mony waters, than onything else 'at I can think o'.”  Hugh stood and gazed at her in astonishment.  To his more refined ear, there was a strange incongruity between the somewhat coarse dialect in which she spoke, and the things she uttered in it.  Not that he was capable of entering into her feelings, much less of explaining them to her.  He felt that there was something remarkable in them, but attributed both the thoughts themselves and their influence on him, to an uncommon and weird imagination.  As of such origin, however, he was just the one to value them highly.  “Those are very strange ideas,” he said.  “But what can there be about the wood?  The very primroses--ye brocht me the first this spring yersel', Mr. Sutherland--come out at the fit o' the trees, and look at me as if they said, 'We ken--we ken a' aboot it;' but never a word mair they say.  There's something by ordinar' in't.”  “Do you like no other place besides?” said Hugh, for the sake of saying something.  “Ou ay, mony ane; but nane like this.”  “What kind of place do you like best?”  “I like places wi' green grass an' flowers amo't.”  “You like flowers then?”  “Like them! whiles they gar me greet an' whiles they gar me lauch; but there's mair i' them than that, an' i' the wood too.  I canna richtly say my prayers in ony ither place.”  The Scotch dialect, especially to one brought up in the Highlands, was a considerable antidote to the effect of the beauty of what Margaret said.  Suddenly it struck Hugh, that if Margaret were such an admirer of nature, possibly she might enjoy Wordsworth.  He himself was as yet incapable of doing him anything like justice; and, with the arrogance of youth, did not hesitate to smile at the Excursion, picking out an awkward line here and there as especial food for laughter even.  But many of his smaller pieces he enjoyed very heartily, although not thoroughly--the element of Christian Pantheism, which is their soul, being beyond his comprehension, almost perception, as yet.  So he made up his mind, after a moment's reflection, that this should be the next author he recommended to his pupil.  He hoped likewise so to end an interview, in which he might otherwise be compelled to confess that he could render Margaret no assistance in her search after the something in the wood; and he was unwilling to say he could not understand her; for a power of universal sympathy was one of those mental gifts which Hugh was most anxious to believe he possessed.  “I will bring you another book to-night,” said he “which I think you will like, and which may perhaps help you to find out what is in the wood.”  He said this smiling, half in playful jest, and without any idea of the degree of likelihood that there was notwithstanding in what he said.  For, certainly, Wordsworth, the high-priest of nature, though perhaps hardly the apostle of nature, was more likely than any other writer to contain something of the secret after which Margaret was searching.  Whether she can find it there, may seem questionable.  “Thank you, sir,” said Margaret, gratefully; but her whole countenance looked troubled, as she turned towards her home. Doubtless, however, the trouble vanished before she reached it, for hers was not a nature to cherish disquietude.  Hugh too went home, rather thoughtful.  In the evening, he took a volume of Wordsworth, and repaired, according to his wont, to David's cottage.  It was Saturday, and he would stay to supper.  After they had given the usual time to their studies, Hugh, setting Margaret some exercises in English to write on her slate, while he helped David with some of the elements of Trigonometry, and again going over those elements with her, while David worked out a calculation--after these were over, and while Janet was putting the supper on the table, Hugh pulled out his volume, and, without any preface, read them the Leech-Gatherer.  All listened very intently, Janet included, who delayed several of the operations, that she might lose no word of the verses; David nodding assent every now and then, and ejaculating ay! ay! or eh, man! or producing that strange muffled sound at once common and peculiar to Scotchmen, which cannot be expressed in letters by a nearer approach than hm--hm, uttered, if that can be called uttering, with closed lips and open nasal passage; and Margaret sitting motionless on her creepie, with upturned pale face, and eyes fixed upon the lips of the reader.  When he had ceased, all were silent for a moment, when Janet made some little sign of anxiety about her supper, which certainly had suffered by the delay.  Then, without a word, David turned towards the table and gave thanks.  Turning again to Hugh, who had risen to place his chair, he said,  “That maun be the wark o' a great poet, Mr. Sutherlan'.”  “It's Wordsworth's,” said Hugh.  “Ay! ay!  That's Wordsworth's!  Ay!  Weel, I hae jist heard him made mention o', but I never read word o' his afore.  An' he never repentit o' that same resolution, I'se warrant, 'at he eynds aff wi'.  Hoo does it gang, Mr. Sutherlan'?”  Sutherland read:--       “'God,' said I, 'be my help and stay secure!       I'll think of the leech-gatherer on the lonely moor;'”  and added, “It is said Wordsworth never knew what it was to be in want of money all his life.”  “Nae doubt, nae doubt: he trusted in Him.”  It was for the sake of the minute notices of nature, and not for the religious lesson, which he now seemed to see for the first time, that Hugh had read the poem.  He could not help being greatly impressed by the confidence with which David received the statement he had just made on the authority of De Quincey in his unpleasant article about Wordsworth.  David resumed:  “He maun hae had a gleg 'ee o' his ain, that Maister Wordsworth, to notice a'thing that get.  Weel he maun hae likit leevin' things, puir maukin an' a'--jist like our Robbie Burns for that.  An' see hoo they a' ken ane anither, thae poets.  What says he aboot Burns?--ye needna tell me, Mr. Sutherlan'; I min't weel aneuch.  He says:--       'Him wha walked in glory an' in joy,       Followin' his ploo upo' the muntain-side.'  Puir Robbie! puir Robbie!  But, man, he was a gran' chield efter a'; an' I trust in God he's won hame by this!”  Both Janet and Hugh, who had had a very orthodox education, started, mentally, at this strange utterance; but they saw the eye of David solemnly fixed, as if in deep contemplation, and lighted in its blue depths with an ethereal brightness; and neither of them ventured to speak.  Margaret seemed absorbed for the moment in gazing on her father's face; but not in the least as if it perplexed her like the fir-wood.  To the seeing eye, the same kind of expression would have been evident in both countenances, as if Margaret's reflected the meaning of her father's; whether through the medium of intellectual sympathy, or that of the heart only, it would have been hard to say. Meantime supper had been rather neglected; but its operations were now resumed more earnestly, and the conversation became lighter; till at last it ended in hearty laughter, and Hugh rose and took his leave.     CHAPTER VIII.  A SUNDAY MORNING.  It is the property of good and sound knowledge, to putrifie and dissolve into a number of subtle, idle, unwholesome, and (as I may tearme them) vermiculate questions; which have indeed a kinde of quicknesse, and life of spirite, but no soundnesse of matter, or goodnesse of quality.--LORD BACON.--Advancement of Learning.  The following morning, the laird's family went to church as usual, and Hugh went with them.  Their walk was first across fields, by pleasant footpaths; and then up the valley of a little noisy stream, that obstinately refused to keep Scotch Sabbath, praising the Lord after its own fashion.  They emerged into rather a bleak country before reaching the church, which was quite new, and perched on a barren eminence, that it might be as conspicuous by its position, as it was remarkable for its ugliness.  One grand aim of the reformers of the Scottish ecclesiastical modes, appears to have been to keep the worship pure and the worshippers sincere, by embodying the whole in the ugliest forms that could be associated with the name of Christianity.  It might be wished, however, that some of their followers, and amongst them the clergyman of the church in question, had been content to stop there; and had left the object of worship, as represented by them, in the possession of some lovable attribute; so as not to require a man to love that which is unlovable, or worship that which is not honourable--in a word, to bow down before that which is not divine.  The cause of this degeneracy they share in common with the followers of all other great men as well as of Calvin.  They take up what their leader, urged by the necessity of the time, spoke loudest, never heeding what he loved most; and then work the former out to a logical perdition of everything belonging to the latter.  Hugh, however, thought it was all right: for he had the same good reasons, and no other, for receiving it all, that a Mohammedan or a Buddhist has for holding his opinions; namely, that he had heard those doctrines, and those alone, from his earliest childhood.  He was therefore a good deal startled when, having, on his way home, strayed from the laird's party towards David's, he heard the latter say to Margaret as he came up:  “Dinna ye believe, my bonny doo, 'at there's ony mak' ups or mak' shifts wi' Him. He's aye bringin' things to the licht, no covenin' them up and lattin them rot, an' the moth tak' them.  He sees us jist as we are, and ca's us jist what we are.  It wad be an ill day for a' o's, Maggy, my doo, gin he war to close his een to oor sins, an' ca' us just in his sicht, whan we cudna possibly be just in oor ain or in ony ither body's, no to say his.”  “The Lord preserve's, Dawvid Elginbrod!  Dinna ye believe i' the doctrine o' Justification by Faith, an' you a'maist made an elder o'?”  Janet was the respondent, of course, Margaret listening in silence.  “Ou ay, I believe in't, nae doot; but, troth! the minister, honest man, near-han' gart me disbelieve in't a'thegither wi' his gran' sermon this mornin', about imputit richteousness, an' a clean robe hidin' a foul skin or a crookit back.  Na, na.  May Him 'at woosh the feet o' his friens, wash us a'thegither, and straucht oor crookit banes, till we're clean and weel-faured like his ain bonny sel'.”  “Weel, Dawvid--but that's sanctificaition, ye ken.”  “Ca't ony name 'at you or the minister likes, Janet, my woman.  I daursay there's neither o' ye far wrang after a'; only this is jist my opingan aboot it in sma'--that that man, and that man only, is justifeed, wha pits himsel' into the Lord's han's to sanctifee him. Noo!  An' that'll no be dune by pittin' a robe o' richteousness upo' him, afore he's gotten a clean skin aneath't.  As gin a father cudna bide to see the puir scabbit skin o' his ain wee bit bairnie, ay, or o' his prodigal son either, but bude to hap it a' up afore he cud lat it come near him!  Ahva!”  Here Hugh ventured to interpose a remark.  “But you don't think, Mr. Elginbrod, that the minister intended to say that justification left a man at liberty to sin, or that the robe of Christ's righteousness would hide him from the work of the Spirit?”  “Na; but there is a notion in't o' hidin' frae God himsel'.  I'll tell ye what it is Mr. Sutherlan': the minister's a' richt in himsel', an' sae's my Janet here, an' mony mair; an' aiblins there's a kin' o' trowth in a' 'at they say; but this is my quarrel wi' a' thae words an' words an' airguments, an' seemilies as they ca' them, an' doctrines, an' a' that--they jist haud a puir body at airm's lenth oot ower frae God himsel'.  An' they raise a mist an' a stour a' aboot him, 'at the puir bairn canna see the Father himsel', stan'in' wi' his airms streekit oot as wide's the heavens, to tak' the worn crater,--and the mair sinner, the mair welcome,--hame to his verra hert.  Gin a body wad lea' a' that, and jist get fowk persuâdit to speyk a word or twa to God him lane, the loss, in my opingan, wad be unco sma', and the gain verra great.”  Even Janet dared not reply to the solemnity of this speech; for the seer-like look was upon David's face, and the tears had gathered in his eyes and dimmed their blue.  A kind of tremulous pathetic smile flickered about his beautifully curved mouth, like the glimmer of water in a valley, betwixt the lofty aquiline nose and the powerful but finely modelled chin.  It seemed as if he dared not let the smile break out, lest it should be followed instantly by a burst of tears.  Margaret went close up to her father and took his hand as if she had been still a child, while Janet walked reverentially by him on the other side.  It must not be supposed that Janet felt any uneasiness about her husband's opinions, although she never hesitated to utter what she considered her common-sense notions, in attempted modification of some of the more extreme of them.  The fact was that, if he was wrong, Janet did not care to be right; and if he was right, Janet was sure to be; “for,” said she--and in spirit, if not in the letter, it was quite true--“I never mint at contradickin' him.  My man sall hae his ain get, that sall he.”  But she had one especial grudge at his opinions; which was, that it must have been in consequence of them that he had declined, with a queer smile, the honourable position of Elder of the Kirk; for which Janet considered him, notwithstanding his opinions, immeasurably more fitted than any other man “in the haill country-side--ye may add Scotlan' forby.”  The fact of his having been requested to fill the vacant place of Elder, is proof enough that David was not in the habit of giving open expression to his opinions.  He was looked upon as a douce man, long-headed enough, and somewhat precise in the exaction of the laird's rights, but open-hearted and open-handed with what was his own.  Every one respected him, and felt kindly towards him; some were a little afraid of him; but few suspected him of being religious beyond the degree which is commonly supposed to be the general inheritance of Scotchmen, possibly in virtue of their being brought up upon oatmeal porridge and the Shorter Catechism.  Hugh walked behind the party for a short way, contemplating them in their Sunday clothes: David wore a suit of fine black cloth.  He then turned to rejoin the laird's company.  Mrs. Glasford was questioning her boys, in an intermittent and desultory fashion, about the sermon.  “An' what was the fourth heid, can ye tell me, Willie?”  Willie, the eldest, who had carefully impressed the fourth head upon his memory, and had been anxiously waiting for an opportunity of bringing it out, replied at once:  “Fourthly: The various appellations by which those who have indued the robe of righteousness are designated in Holy Writ.”  “Weel done, Willie!” cried the laird.  “That's richt, Willie,” said his mother.  Then turning to the younger, whose attention was attracted by a strange bird in the hedge in front. “An' what called he them, Johnnie, that put on the robe?” she asked.  “Whited sepulchres,” answered Johnnie, indebted for his wit to his wool-gathering.  This put an end to the catechising.  Mrs. Glasford glanced round at Hugh, whose defection she had seen with indignation, and who, waiting for them by the roadside, had heard the last question and reply, with an expression that seemed to attribute any defect in the answer, entirely to the carelessness of the tutor, and the withdrawal of his energies from her boys to that “saucy quean, Meg Elginbrod.”     CHAPTER IX.  NATURE.  When the Soul is kindled or enlightened by the Holy Ghost, then it beholds what God its Father does, as a Son beholds what his Father does at Home in his own House.--JACOB BEHMEN'S Aurora--Law's Translation.   Margaret began to read Wordsworth, slowly at first, but soon with greater facility.  Ere long she perceived that she had found a friend; for not only did he sympathize with her in her love for nature, putting many vague feelings into thoughts, and many thoughts into words for her, but he introduced her to nature in many altogether new aspects, and taught her to regard it in ways which had hitherto been unknown to her.  Not only was the pine wood now dearer to her than before, but its mystery seemed more sacred, and, at the same time, more likely to be one day solved.  She felt far more assuredly the presence of a spirit in nature,       “Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,       And the round ocean, and the living air;”  for he taught her to take wider views of nature, and to perceive and feel the expressions of more extended aspects of the world around her.  The purple hill-side was almost as dear to her as the fir-wood now; and the star that crowned its summit at eve, sparkled an especial message to her, before it went on its way up the blue.  She extended her rambles in all directions, and began to get with the neighbours the character of an idle girl.  Little they knew how early she rose, and how diligently she did her share of the work, urged by desire to read the word of God in his own handwriting; or rather, to pore upon that expression of the face of God, which, however little a man may think of it, yet sinks so deeply into his nature, and moulds it towards its own likeness.  Nature was doing for Margaret what she had done before for Wordsworth's Lucy: she was making of her “a lady of her own.”  She grew taller and more graceful.  The lasting quiet of her face began to look as if it were ever upon the point of blossoming into an expression of lovely feeling.  The principal change was in her mouth, which became delicate and tender in its curves, the lips seeming to kiss each other for very sweetness.  But I am anticipating these changes, for it took a far longer time to perfect them than has yet been occupied by my story.  But even her mother was not altogether proof against the appearance of listlessness and idleness which Margaret's behaviour sometimes wore to her eyes; nor could she quite understand or excuse her long lonely walks; so that now and then she could not help addressing her after this fashion:  “Meg!  Meg! ye do try my patience, lass, idlin' awa' yer time that get.  It's an awfu' wastery o' time, what wi' beuks, an' what wi' stravaguin', an' what wi' naething ava.  Jist pit yer han' to this kirn noo, like a gude bairn.”  Margaret would obey her mother instantly, but with a look of silent expostulation which her mother could not resist; sometimes, perhaps, if the words were sharper than usual, with symptoms of gathering tears; upon which Janet would say, with her honest smile of sweet relenting,  “Hootoots, bairn! never heed me.  My bark's aye waur nor my bite; ye ken that.”  Then Margaret's face would brighten at once, and she would work hard at whatever her mother set her to do, till it was finished; upon which her mother would be more glad than she, and in no haste to impose any further labour out of the usual routine.  In the course of reading Wordsworth, Margaret had frequent occasion to apply to Hugh for help.  These occasions, however, generally involved no more than small external difficulties, which prevented her from taking in the scope of a passage.  Hugh was always able to meet these, and Margaret supposed that the whole of the light which flashed upon her mind when they were removed, was poured upon the page by the wisdom of her tutor; never dreaming--such was her humility with regard to herself, and her reverence towards him--that it came from the depths of her own lucent nature, ready to perceive what the poet came prepared to show.  Now and then, it is true, she applied to him with difficulties in which he was incapable of aiding her; but she put down her failure in discovering the meaning, after all which it must be confessed he sometimes tried to say, to her own stupidity or peculiarity--never to his incapacity.  She had been helped to so much by his superior acquirements, and his real gift for communicating what he thoroughly understood; he had been so entirely her guide to knowledge, that she would at once have felt self-condemned of impiety--in the old meaning of the word--if she had doubted for a moment his ability to understand or explain any difficulty which she could place clearly before him.  By-and-by he began to lend her harder, that is, more purely intellectual books.  He was himself preparing for the class of Moral Philosophy and Metaphysics; and he chose for her some of the simpler of his books on these subjects--of course all of the Scotch school--beginning with Abercrombie's Intellectual Powers.  She took this eagerly, and evidently read it with great attention.  One evening in the end of summer, Hugh climbed a waste heathery hill that lay behind the house of Turriepuffit, and overlooked a great part of the neighbouring country, the peaks of some of the greatest of the Scotch mountains being visible from its top.  Here he intended to wait for the sunset.  He threw himself on the heather, that most delightful and luxurious of all couches, supporting the body with a kindly upholding of every part; and there he lay in the great slumberous sunlight of the late afternoon, with the blue heavens, into which he was gazing full up, closing down upon him, as the light descended the side of the sky.  He fell fast asleep.  If ever there be an excuse for falling asleep out of bed, surely it is when stretched at full length upon heather in bloom.  When he awoke, the last of the sunset was dying away; and between him and the sunset sat Margaret, book in hand, waiting apparently for his waking.  He lay still for a few minutes, to come to himself before she should see he was awake.  But she rose at the moment, and drawing near very quietly, looked down upon him with her sweet sunset face, to see whether or not he was beginning to rouse, for she feared to let him lie much longer after sundown.  Finding him awake, she drew back again without a word, and sat down as before with her book.  At length he rose, and, approaching her, said--  “Well, Margaret, what book are you at now?”  “Dr. Abercrombie, sir,” replied Margaret.  “How do you like it?”  “Verra weel for some things.  It makes a body think; but not a'thegither as I like to think either.”  It will be observed that Margaret's speech had begun to improve, that is, to be more like English.  “What is the matter with it?”  “Weel, ye see, sir, it taks a body a' to bits like, and never pits them together again.  An' it seems to me that a body's min' or soul, or whatever it may be called--but it's jist a body's ain sel'--can no more be ta'en to pieces like, than you could tak' that red licht there oot o' the blue, or the haill sunset oot o' the heavens an' earth.  It may be a' verra weel, Mr. Sutherland, but oh! it's no like this!”  And Margaret looked around her from the hill-top, and then up into the heavens, where the stars were beginning to crack the blue with their thin, steely sparkle.  “It seems to me to tak' a' the poetry oot o' us, Mr. Sutherland.”  “Well, well,” said Hugh, with a smile, “you must just go to Wordsworth to put it in again; or to set you again up after Dr. Abercrombie has demolished you.”  “Na, na, sir, he sanna demolish me: nor I winna trouble Mr. Wordsworth to put the poetry into me again.  A' the power on earth shanna tak' that oot o' me, gin it be God's will; for it's his ain gift, Mr. Sutherland, ye ken.”  “Of course, of course,” replied Hugh, who very likely thought this too serious a way of speaking of poetry, and therefore, perhaps, rather an irreverent way of speaking of God; for he saw neither the divine in poetry, nor the human in God. Could he be said to believe that God ma